Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering

Mackenzie Building 277
Telephone: 788-5784
Fax: 788-3951

The Department
    Chair of the Department: J.L. Humar
    Departmental Supervisor of Graduate Studies: K.T. Law

The Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering offers programs of
study and research leading to the Master of Engineering and Ph.D. degrees
in Civil and Environmental Engineering. These degrees are offered through
the Ottawa-Carleton Institute for Civil Engineering which is jointly
administered by the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at
Carleton University, and the Department of Civil Engineering at the
University of Ottawa. For further information, including admission and
program requirements, see page 111.

    The Department conducts research and has developed graduate programs
    in the following areas:

    *   Geotechnical Engineering

        The graduate program in geotechnical engineering places an
        emphasis on both theoretical and applied problems related to
        soil and rock mechanics and foundation engineering. These
        generally include the study of mechanical properties of soil and
        rock materials, stability of natural slopes and earth
        embankments, soil-foundation-structure interaction, and problems
        in foundation design and geomechanics. Broader programs in
        geotechnical engineering may be arranged by making use of
        courses offered in the Department of Geography at Carleton
        University and in the Department of Civil Engineering at the
        University of Ottawa.

        Graduate research in geotechnical engineering is primarily
        directed towards the following areas:

        - Soil-Foundation Interaction

          Elastic and consolidation effects of soil-foundation
          interaction; soil-frame interaction; contact stress
          measurement; performance of rigid and flexible foundations;
          buried pipelines.

        - Earth Retaining Structures

          Experimental and analytical studies of anchored and braced
          excavations, flexible and rigid retaining walls, soil
          reinforcement, tunnels and conduits, field behaviour.

        - Bearing Capacity and Settlement

          Problems related to design of bridge abutments and footings
          located on sloped granular fill, experimental and field
          studies.

        - In-Situ Testing of Soils

          The use of devices such as the pressuremeter, the screw plate
          test, the borehole shear device, and borehole dilatometer in
          the assessment of geotechnical properties of soils.

        - Mechanical Behaviour

          Development of constitutive relations for soils and rock
          masses with yield and creep characteristics; applications to
          foundation engineering.

        - Mechanics of Geological Structures

          Large strain phenomena; buckling of strata; applications to
          underground storage structures; hydraulic fracture of oil- and
          gas-bearing geological media.

        - Performance of Anchors

          Theoretical and experimental analysis of deep and shallow
          anchors in soil, rock and concrete; group action; creep
          effects; prestress loss.

        - Nuclear Waste Disposal

          Theoretical modelling of rockmass-buffer-canister interaction
          during moisture migration; non-homogeneous swelling of buffer
          materials; swelling pressures in buffer systems; coupled heat
          and moisture flow in materials.

    *   Structural Engineering

        The graduate program in structural engineering embodies a broad
        spectrum of topics involving material behaviour, structural
        mechanics and analysis, and the behaviour and design of
        buildings and bridges. These topics are in the following fields:
        computer applications in structural analysis; structural
        dynamics, seismic analysis, earthquake engineering; finite
        element analysis; structural systems and design optimization;
        behaviour and design of steel, concrete, composite, timber and
        masonry structures; integrated treatment of structural,
        mechanical and electrical building requirements; construction
        economics; project planning; and bridge engineering. Graduate
        research in structural engineering is primarily directed towards
        the following areas:

    *   Computer Applications in Structural Design

        Development of knowledge-based systems for the analysis, design,
        detailing, fabrication and erection of buildings and bridges.
        Includes graphic interfaces, pre- and post-processing of frame
        analysis, load determination and finite element analysis
        packages.

    *   Seismic Analysis and Design

        Seismic response of set-back and other irregular buildings;
        computer analyses of linear and non-linear structural response;
        design of buildings for seismic forces; seismic behaviour of
        liquid storage tanks; fluid structure interaction problems.

    *   Continuum Mechanics

        Linear and non-linear problems in elasticity; analysis of
        contact problems in elasticity, plasticity, and viscoelasticity;
        mechanics of composite materials; fracture processes in
        geological materials; finite deformations of rubber-like
        materials; poro-elasticity and micromechanics.

    *   Numerical Modelling of Buildings and Bridges

        Advanced analytical modelling of reinforced and prestressed
        concrete, steel, and composite concrete-steel buildings and
        bridges. Material and geometric non-linearities, bond-slip, the
        advent and propagation of cracks, tension-stiffening and
        shear-connectors behaviour are modelled to predict the full
        response of structures up to failure.

    *   Behaviour and Design of Steel, Concrete and Composite Structures

        Analytical and experimental studies of structural members,
        substructures and connections for buildings, bridges and
        offshore structures. Development of the corresponding limit
        states design format design rules.

    *   Masonry Behaviour and Design

        Study of strength and serviceability issues by means of
        theoretical approaches, testing and field work.

    *   Timber Structures

        Analysis, design and performance evaluation of wood-structured
        systems and components; structural reliability.

    *   Transportation Planning and Technology

        The graduate program in transportation planning and technology
        deals with problems of policy, planning, economics, design, and
        operations in all modes of transportation. In the area of
        transportation planning, the focus is on the design of transport
        systems, including terminals, modelling and simulation, urban
        and regional studies, traffic engineering, and geometric design.
        In the transportation technology area, programs deal with
        technology of vehicles and facilities, acoustics and noise,
        materials and pavement design. Graduate research in
        transportation is currently focused on the following areas:

    *   Transport Policy

        Assessment and impact analysis of national, regional, and urban
        transportation policies.

    *   Planning and Design Methodology

        Development and application of models for optimization of
        transport supply, transportation system management.

    *   Travel and Traffic Analysis

        Behavioural theories of passenger travel, goods movement,
        empirical traffic studies.

    *   Transportation Terminals

        Airport planning, air terminal design; bus, rail, subway
        terminal design, layout methods, pedestrian traffic.

    *   Transportation Technology Development and Assessment

        Modernization of passenger and freight rail services; soil
        properties; pavement design, multi-layered systems, low
        temperature cracking of pavements, thermo-mechanical modelling
        of fracture processes in pavements, highway design, energy.

Departmental Facilities

    The structures laboratory facility includes an 11 m x 27 m strong
    floor with a clear height of 11 m; a strong pit, measuring 3 m x 3.7
    m x 6.6 m for geotechnical and highway material testing; a 400,000
    lb. universal testing machine with auxiliary equipment for load and
    displacement control; numerous hydraulic actuators; test frames;
    specialized equipment for torsion and impact studies; and a wide
    selection of measurement devices (strain gauges, LVDTs, pressure
    transducers, load cells, thermocouples) and several data acquisition
    systems for testing structural materials and components. The concrete
    laboratory has facilities for the casting, curing, and testing of
    reinforced concrete members. Laboratory facilities in geotechnical
    engineering include both large scale and conventional tri-axial
    testing, consolidation testing, pore water pressure measurements, and
    model studies of contact stress measurements. The soil dynamics and
    highway materials laboratories provide facilities for studies of the
    physical properties of soil, stabilized soil, aggregate and
    bituminous mixtures.

    Computer-related equipment with the department comprises an HP9000,
    several Apollo and SUN workstations, a network of microcomputers and
    related peripherals. The computing centre of the University provides
    access to a Honeywell Level 66 computer and SUN4 workstation. A
    library of computer programs in structural, geotechnical and
    transportation engineering provides a significant resource for
    advanced study and research.

Graduate Courses

All courses listed are one term courses and may be offered in either fall
or winter with the exception of projects and theses. Please consult the
current course listing at the beginning of the fall and winter terms.

*   Engineering 82.511 (CVG7120)
    Introductory Elasticity
    Stresses and strains in a continuum; transformations, invariants;
    equations of motion; constitutive relations, generalized Hooke's Law,
    bounds for elastic constants: strain energy, superposition,
    uniqueness; formulation of plane stress and plane strain problems in
    rectangular Cartesian and curvilinear coordinates, Airy-Mitchell
    stress functions and Fourier solutions, application of classical
    solutions to problems of engineering interest.

*   Engineering 82.512 (CVG7121)
    Advanced Elasticity
    Continuation of topics introduced in Engineering 82.511. Complex
    variable solutions: torsional and thermal stresses; axially symmetric
    three-dimensional problems, Love's strain potential,
    Boussinesq-Galerkin stress functions; problems related to infinite
    and semi-infinite domains. Introduction to numerical methods of
    stress analysis, comparison of solutions.
    Prerequisite: Engineering 82.511 or permission of the Department.

*   Engineering 82.513 (CVG7122)
    Finite Element Methods in Stress Analysis
    Stress-strain and strain-displacement relationships from elasticity.
    Plane stress and plane strain finite elements. Lagrange interpolation
    and Lagrange based element families. Introduction to the theory of
    thin plates; overview at plate bending elements. General formulation
    of the finite element method.

*   Engineering 82.514 (CVG7123)
    Earthquake Engineering and Analysis
    Advanced topics in earthquake engineering: description of earthquake
    motions, seismological background; analysis of earthquake response,
    response spectrum approach, multiple input excitation, extended Ritz
    coordinates, complex eigenproblem analysis; response analysis via
    frequency domain; design considerations and code requirements,
    earthquake forces in building codes; dynamic soil-structure
    interaction, direct method, substructure method, fundamentals of wave
    propagation, half-space modelling of soil; dynamic fluid-structure
    interaction, incompressible and compressible fluid elements,
    substructure method with liquid continuum; special topics of current
    interests.
    Prerequisite: Engineering 82.516 or permission of the Department.

*   Engineering 82.515 (CVG7124)
    Advanced Finite Element Analysis in Structural Mechanics
    Fundamentals of calculus of variations; variational and Galerkin
    formulations: assumed displacement, assumed stress and hybrid
    elements; isoparametric elements and numerical integration; plate
    bending: convergence, completeness and conformity, patch test,
    Kirchhoff and Mindlin plate theories, nonlinear elasticity and
    plasticity; cracking and non-linearities in reinforced concrete
    structures; incremental and iterative schemes, geometric
    non-linearity: small strainþlarge displacement, large strainþlarge
    displacement, Eulerian and Lagrangian formulations; finite elements
    in dynamics; finite element programing.
    Prerequisite: Engineering 82.513 or permission of the Department.

*   Engineering 82.516 (CVG7137)
    Dynamics of Structures
    Structural dynamics, single and multi-degree-of-freedom systems,
    formulation of equations of motion, methods of analytical mechanics,
    free and forced vibrations, normal mode analysis, numerical methods
    for the response analyses of single and multiple-degree-of-freedom
    systems.

*   Engineering 82.520 (CVG7138)
    Engineered Masonry Behaviour and Design
    Properties of masonry materials and assemblages. Behaviour and design
    of walls, columns and lintels. Treatment of specialized design and
    construction topics. Design of lowrise and highrise structures.
    Discussion of masonry problems. Emphasis throughout the course is
    placed on a practice-oriented approach.

*   Engineering 82.522 (CVG7139)
    Behaviour and Design of Steel Structures
    Brittle fracture and fatigue; behaviour of plate girders; composite
    beams, girders and columns; stub girders; plastic design principles;
    frame behaviour; structural stability; bracing of members and frames.
    Prerequisite: Engineering 82.524 or permission of the Department.

*   Engineering 82.523 (CVG7125)
    Theory of Structural Stability
    Elastic and inelastic behaviour of beam-columns; elastic and
    inelastic buckling of frames; application of energy methods to
    buckling problems; lateral-torsional buckling of columns and beams;
    buckling of plates; local buckling of columns and beams.
    Prerequisite: Engineering 82.525 or equivalent.

*   Engineering 82.524 (CVG7126)
    Behaviour and Design of Structural Steel Members
    Limit states design philosophy; material behaviour; tension members;
    plate buckling; torsion; lateral torsional buckling; beams, axially
    loaded columns and beam-column behaviour; bolted and welded
    connections; applications in design.

*   Engineering 82.525 (CVG7127)
    Analysis of Elastic Structures
    Application of matrices to structural analysis; force and
    displacement method of analysis for framed elastic planar and space
    structures; symmetric and anti-symmetric structures.

*   Engineering 82.526 (CVG7128)
    Prestressed Concrete
    Prestressed concrete materials; working stress design for flexure;
    ultimate strength design for flexure, shear, and torsion; prestress
    losses; deflection and camber; slabs; indeterminate beams and frames;
    introduction to prestressed bridges and circular tanks.

*   Engineering 82.527 (CVG7129)
    Advanced Structural Design
    A number of topics, such as the evolution of a structure, structural
    form, aesthetics, progressive collapse, and design in various
    structural materials, are treated by members of the Department and
    outside experts.

*   Engineering 82.528 (CVG7130)
    Advanced Reinforced Concrete
    The research background, development, and limitations in current
    building code provisions for reinforced concrete; yield line theory
    of slabs; safety and limit state design; computer design of concrete
    structures.

*   Engineering 82.529 (CVG7100)
    Case Studies in Geotechnical Engineering
    The critical study of case histories relating to current procedures
    of design and construction in geotechnical engineering. The
    importance of instrumentation and monitoring field behaviour will be
    stressed. In-situ testing.

*   Engineering 82.530 (CVG7101)
    Advanced Soil Mechanics I
    Effective stress, pore pressure parameters, saturated and partially
    saturated soils; seepage; permeability tensor, solutions of the
    Laplace equation; elastic equilibrium; anisotropy, non-homogeneity,
    consolidation theories; shear strength of cohesive and cohesionless
    soils.

*   Engineering 82.531 (CVG7102)
    Advanced Soil Mechanics II
    Plasticity in soil mechanics; failure and yield criteria, plastic
    equilibrium, upper and lower bound solutions, uniqueness theorems;
    statically and kinematically admissible states; stability analysis
    of cohesive and cohesionless soils.

*   Engineering 82.533 (CVG7160)
    Pavements and Materials
    An analysis of the interaction of materials, traffic, and climate in
    the planning, design construction, evaluation, maintenance, and
    rehabilitation of highway and airport pavements.

*   Engineering 82.534 (CVG7150)
    Intercity Transportation, Planning and Management
    Current modal and intermodal issues, including energy. Framework and
    process of intercity transport planning and management. Recent trends
    and system development. Passenger and freight demand and service
    characteristics. Future prospects and possibilities.

*   Engineering 82.535 (CVG7151)
    Traffic Engineering
    Introduction to principles of traffic engineering. Basic
    characteristics of drivers, vehicles, and traffic. Volume, speed, and
    delay studies. Traffic stream characteristics and queuing theory.
    Capacity analysis of roads and intersections. Safety.

*   Engineering 82.536 (CVG7152)
    Highway Materials
    Materials characterization and strength evaluation of soils,
    stabilized soils, aggregates, and asphalt concrete. Effects of low
    temperatures and frost on materials behaviour.

*   Engineering 82.537 (CVG7153)
    Urban Transportation Planning and Management
    Urban transportation systems planning and management. Urban
    development models þ an introduction. Urban transportation policy.

*   Engineering 82.538 (CVG7154)
    Geometric Design
    Basic highway geometric design concepts. Vertical and horizontal
    alignment. Cross-sections. Interchange forms and design. Adaptability
    and spacing of interchanges. Design of operational flexibility;
    operational uniformity, and route continuity on freeways.

*   Engineering 82.539 (CVG7155)
    Transportation Supply
    Advanced treatment of transportation planning and management concepts
    and techniques: transport supply issues, capacity and costs,
    evaluation of system improvements and extensions, transportation and
    development, policy impact analysis.

*   Engineering 82.541 (CVG7156)
    Transportation Economics and Policy
    Transportation, economic analysis framework. Transport industry
    output. Carrier operations. Issue of resource utilization,
    measurement, economics, supply of infrastructure, pricing; subsidies,
    externalities. Transport policy in Canada.

*   Engineering 82.542 (CVG7159)
    Transportation Terminals
    Framework for passenger terminal planning and design. Theory: the
    transfer function and network modelling; pedestrian flow
    characteristics; capacity of corridors, stairs, escalators, and
    elevators; layout planning. Practical applications: air, rail, metro,
    bus, ferry, and multi-modal terminals.

*   Engineering 82.543 (CVG7158)
    Airport Planning
    Framework for airport planning and design. Aircraft characteristics;
    demand forecasting; airport site selection; noise, airside capacity;
    geometric design; the passenger terminal complex; cargo area; general
    aviation; ground transportation; land use planning.

*   Engineering 82.550 (CVG7104)
    Earth Retaining Structures
    Approaches to the theoretical and semi-empirical analysis of earth
    retaining structures. Review of the earth pressure theories. Analysis
    and design methods for rigid and flexible retaining walls, braced
    excavations, and tunnels. Instrumentation and performance studies.

*   Engineering 82.551 (CVG7105)
    Foundation Engineering
    Review of methods of estimating compression and shear strength of
    soils. Bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations. Foundations
    in slopes. Pile groups. Use of in-situ testing for design purposes.

*   Engineering 82.552 (CVG7106)
    In-Situ Methods in Geomechanics
    Scope of a subsurface exploration program. Techniques of soil and
    rock sampling. Geo-physical methods. Mechanical and hydraulic
    properties of soil and rock. In-situ determination of strength,
    deformability and permeability of soils and rocks. Critical
    evaluation of vane, pressuremeter, screw plate, flat dilatometer,
    borehole shear and plate load tests. Pumping, recharge and packer
    tests. Permeability of jointed rocks. Rock testing techniques,
    borehole dilatometer, flat jack, cable jacking tests. Properties of
    rock joints. In-situ stress measurements.

*   Engineering 82.553 (CVG7107)
    Numerical Methods in Geomechanics
    Critical review of advanced theories of soil and rock behaviour.
    Linear elasticity, non-homogeneity and anisotropy. Plasticity models.
    Generalized Mohr-Coulomb and Rucker-Prager failure criteria. Critical
    state and cap models. Dilatancy effects. Associative and
    non-associative flow rules. Hardening rules, hypo-elasticity. Soil
    consolidation, visco-elasticity and creep behaviour of rock masses.
    Rock joints. Finite element formulation of nonlinear problems.
    Iterative schemes; tangent stiffness, initial stress and initial
    strain techniques, mixed methods. Time marching schemes. Solution of
    typical boundary value problems in geomechanics with the aid of
    existing research class finite element codes.
    Prerequisite:  Engineering 82.511, 82.513, or permission of the
    Department.

*   Engineering 82.554 (CVG7108)
    Seepage and Waterflow through Soils
    Surface-subsurface water relations. Steady flow. Flownet techniques.
    Numerical techniques. Seepage analogy models. Anisotropic and layered
    soils. Water retaining structures. Safety against erosion and piping.
    Filter design. Steady and non-steady flow towards wells. Multiple
    well systems. Subsidence due to ground water pumping.

*   Engineering 82.560 (CVG7131)
    Project Management
    Introduction to managing the development, design, and construction
    of buildings. Examination of project management for the total
    development process, including interrelationships among owners,
    developers, financing sources, designers, contractors, and users;
    role and tasks of the project manager; setting of project objectives;
    feasibility analyses; budgets and financing; government regulations;
    environmental and social constraints, control of cost, time, and
    content quality and process; human factors.

*   Engineering 82.561 (CVG7140)
    Statistics, Probabilities and Decision-Making Applications in Civil
    Engineering
    Review of basic concepts in statistics and the Theory of
    Probabilities. Bayes' Theorem. Probability distributions. Moments.
    Parameter Estimation. Goodness-of-fit. Regression and correlation.
    OC curves. Monte Carlo simulation. Probability-based design criteria.
    Systems reliability. Limit States Design. Selected applications in
    transportation, geomechanics and structures. Emphasis will be given
    to problem solving. Use of existing computer software.

*   Engineering 82.562 (CVG7141)
    Advanced Methods in Computer-Aided Design
    Representation and processing of design constraints (such as building
    codes and other design rules); decision tables; constraint
    satisfaction. Automatic integrity and consistency maintenance of
    design databases; integrated CAD systems. Introduction to geometric
    modelling. Introduction to artificial intelligence.

*   Engineering 82.563 (CVG7132)
    Computer-Aided Design of Building Structures
    Relevant aspects of computer systems, information handling, auxiliary
    storage; design methods, computerized design systems, computer
    graphics; application of structural theory; examination of a selected
    series of structural engineering programs and programming systems.

*   Engineering 82.564 (CVG7142)
    Engineering Management
    Engineering management principles, including program and project
    organization, personnel management, major management systems, project
    management, legal aspects of management, communication problems,
    politics and management, management of the engineering competition
    and union-management problems.

*   Engineering 82.565 (CVG7143)
    Design of Steel Bridges
    Basic features of steel bridges, design of slab-on-girder, box girder
    and truss bridges. Composite and non-composite design. Introduction
    to long span suspension and cable-stayed bridges. Discussion of
    relevant codes and specifications.

*   Engineering 82.566 (CVG7144)
    Design of Concrete Bridges
    Concrete and reinforcing steel properties, basic features of concrete
    bridges, design of superstructure in reinforced concrete slab,
    slab-on-girder and box girder bridges, an introduction to prestressed
    concrete bridges, design of bridge piers and abutments. In all cases
    the relevant provisions of Canadian bridge codes are discussed.

*   Engineering 82.575-82.579 (CVG7300-7304)
    Special Topics in Structural Engineering
    Courses in special topics related to building design and
    construction, not covered by other graduate courses; details will be
    available some months prior to registration.

*   Engineering 82.580-82.584 (CVG7305-7309)
    Special Topics in Geotechnical Engineering
    Courses in special topics in geotechnical engineering, not covered
    by other graduate courses; details will be available some months
    prior to registration.

*   Engineering 82.580 (CVG7305)
    Analysis of Embankments and Slopes
    Stability of embankments of soft clays; stress-strain analysis;
    anisotropy; strain rate effect; short and long-term settlement;
    methods of slope stability analysis; progressive failure; use of
    stability charts; slope analysis for residual and unsaturated soils.

*   Engineering 82.585-82.589 (CVG7310-7314)
    Special Topics in Transportation Planning and Technology
    Courses in special topics in transportation engineering, not covered
    by other graduate courses; details will be available some months
    prior to registration.

*   Engineering 82.590
    Civil Engineering Project
    Students enrolled in the M.Eng. program by course work will conduct
    an engineering study, analysis, or design project under the general
    supervision of a member of the Department.

*   Engineering 82.596 and 82.597
    Directed Studies

*   Engineering 82.599
    M.Eng. Thesis

*   Engineering 82.699
    Ph.D. Thesis

Other Courses of Particular Interest

Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
    88.514     Ground Transportation Systems and Vehicles
    88.517     Experimental Stress Analysis
    88.521     Methods of Energy Conversion
    88.550     Advanced Vibration Analysis
    88.561     Creative Problem Solving and Design
    88.562     Failure Prevention
    88.568     Advanced Engineering Materials

Systems and Computer Engineering
    94.501     Simulation and Modelling

Geography
    45.415E    Slope Development: Forms, Processes and Stability
    45.417     Glacial Geomorphology
    45.532     Soil Thermal and Hydrologic Properties
    45.533     Periglacial Geomorphology
    45.534     Aspects of Clay Mineralogy and Soil Chemistry
    45.579     Research and Development in Outdoor Recreational
               Geography

Public Administration
    50.510     Management Accounting
    50.511     Financial Management

