Program Director Positions, Geotechnical and GeoHazards Systems,
Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems (CMS), Directorate for
Engineering at National Science Foundation


Dear Colleague:

The Directorate for Engineering (ENG) announces a nationwide
search to fill two Program Director positions at the National
Science Foundation (NSF) in the Division of Civil and Mechanical
Systems (CMS).

The CMS Division includes ten Program Directors who manage a
collective annual research budget of approximately $55 million,
and two Program Directors who manage the George E. Brown, Jr.
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) project, the
first MREFC (Major Research Equipment and Facility Construction)
project for the Directorate for Engineering. The organization of
the CMS Division is described at http://www.eng.nsf.gov/cms/, and
information about the NEES project can be found at
http://www.eng.nsf.gov/nees. The CMS Division enables knowledge
creation and intellectual growth in construction, geotechnical
and geo-environmental engineering, structures, dynamics and
control, sensors, mechanics, materials, tribology, and reduction
of risks induced by earthquakes and other natural, man made, and
technological hazards. The Division encourages cross-disciplinary
research at the intersections and beyond the boundaries of
traditional disciplines to promote discoveries and capitalize on
emerging fields of science and engineering including
nanotechnology, biotechnology, and information technology.

This letter encourages expressions of interest from people with
expertise in Geotechnical and GeoHazards Systems.  The
Geotechnical and Geohazards Systems (GHS) Program supports
research to advance the fundamental engineering and related
knowledge for geostructures (foundations, slopes, excavations,
soil and rock improvement technologies, and reinforcement
systems); geohazards mitigation, especially earthquakes and
tsunamis; constitutive modeling and verification; remediation and
containment of geoenvironmental contamination; transferability of
laboratory results to field scale; and non-destructive and in
situ evaluation of geologic conditions.    The GHS Program is
divided into two program elements: Geomechanics and Geotechnical
Systems (GGS) and Geoenvironmental Engineering and GeoHazards
Mitigation (GEH).  Program Managers are sought for both program
elements.
The research portfolio for the GGS program element includes
projects on geomechanics, geotechnical engineering, problem
soils, weak rocks, rock mechanics and rock engineering, and
mining engineering.  Support is given for research that will
increase geotechnical knowledge for foundations, slopes,
excavations and other geostructures, including soil and rock
improvement technologies and reinforcement systems; constitutive
modeling, scale effects and model verification in geomechanics;
and non-destructive, remote and in situ evaluation of soil and
rock properties.
The research portfolio for the GEH program element includes
projects on geoenvironmental engineering, including physical,
chemical, thermal and biological processes that affect the
properties of geologic materials, and analysis and construction
in and with geo-materials for geoenvironmental applications.  The
GEH program also supports research in geological engineering and
engineering geology, geotechnical earthquake engineering and
strong ground motions, piping (particle erosion, transport, and
deposition), scouring, tsunamis (both earthquake and non-
earthquake generated), landslides and debris flows.

The NSF environment is both demanding and exciting, and Program
Directors have a tremendous opportunity to help shape the
research agenda in very significant ways.  NSF Program Directors
bear the primary responsibility for carrying out the Agency's
overall mission: to support innovative and merit-reviewed
activities in research and education that are fundamental to the
nation's well-being and national security.  To discharge this
responsibility well requires not only domain knowledge, but also
a commitment to high standards, a considerable breadth of
interest and receptivity to new ideas, a strong sense of
fairness, and a high degree of personal integrity.  NSF Program
Directors are responsible for providing stewardship of integrated
research and education in a particular discipline, a set of
disciplines, and/or across disciplines within the context of
agency vision, mission, and goals, and within the framework of
guiding legislation and agency policies and resources.

The positions require an engineering Ph.D. degree or equivalent
experience in geotechnical or geoenvironmental engineering, plus
six or more years of successful research, administration,
industry and/or managerial experience pertinent to the position.
All appointees are expected to function both within specific
program boundaries as well as in a team mode within virtual
organizations in the Directorate, across the Foundation, and with
other Federal and State government agencies and private-sector
organizations as necessary.  Periodic appointments to leadership
of inter-divisional, inter-directorate and interagency programs
may be made.

The Program Directors recruited under this announcement will be
appointed for one to two years under the Visiting
Scientist/Engineer or the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (VSE or
IPA ‘rotator” position), or as a Temporary or Permanent Federal
Appointee.  The specific arrangement will be decided on an
individual basis.   NSF is particularly interested in attracting
qualified candidates from under under-represented groups (women
and minorities) to this position.

Please send nominations, statements of interest, and resumes
regarding the GHS Program Director positions to:

     Dr. P. Balaguru
     CMS Personnel Search Coordinator
     Directorate for Engineering
     National Science Foundation
     4201 Wilson Boulevard, Room 545
     Arlington, Virginia 22230
     Tel:     (703) 292-8360
     Fax:    (703) 292-9053
     E mail:  pbalagur@nsf.gov

Formal consideration of applications for the GHS Program Director
will commence immediately and will continue until a successful
candidate has been identified.

Please consider spending a part of your career at NSF. If such an
opportunity is difficult to arrange now, keep the idea alive and
reconsider it in the future. Working as part of the NSF team of
Program Directors will change the way you view the world, and you
will be serving your technical community and the Nation. NSF
encourages qualified people to apply from groups underrepresented
in the engineering community. Please convey this message to your
colleagues who have a vision for the opportunities facing
engineering in education and research, who would make a strong
contribution to the work of the Directorate for Engineering, and
who could meet the stimulating challenges of an appointment in
the Foundation.

The National Science Foundation provides reasonable
accommodations to applicants with disabilities on a case-by-case
basis.  If you need reasonable accommodation for any part of the
application and hiring process, please notify the point of
contact listed.

NSF IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER COMMITTED TO EMPLOYING A
HIGHLY QUALIFIED STAFF THAT REFLECTS THE DIVERSITY OF OUR NATION.

Sincerely,

Priscilla P. Nelson
Director, Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems
Tel:     (703) 292-8360
Fax:    (703) 292-9053
email:  pnelson@nsf.gov

