Canada Geological Engineering University Programs





homeuniversitiescollegesprogramsstudent infograduationemploymentnews
















    Custom Search
  


Canada Geological Engineering University ProgramsBrowse through the list of Canadian Geological Engineering bachelor, masters, and doctorate courses, programs and degrees offered by universities in Canada.
What is Geological Engineering?Geological Engineering is the application of engineering principles to natural materials and fluids such as soils, rocks, groundwater, and petroleum.  Geological engineers search for sources of minerals, groundwater, and petroleum; they also design mines and well fields to develop these resources.Geological engineering and geotechnical engineering are very similar (and many schools group them together under one program); however geological engineering focuses more on natural resources and how to extract them, while geotechnical engineering focuses more on civil engineering practices such as building structures with an eye to the surrounding geology.
| « Canada University Programs |
Geological Engineering in CanadaAll Programs
  British Columbia
  Greater Vancouver
  New Brunswick
  Ontario
  Saskatchewan

Graduate Programs  Canada
  British Columbia
  Greater Vancouver
  Ontario
  Saskatchewan

Doctorate Programs  Canada

Study and Work in Geological Engineering in Canada
Geological Engineering Admission RequirementsThe prequisites required to become accepted in an undergraduate program in Geological Engineering.
Graduate Geological Engineering Admission RequirementsThe prequisites required to become accepted in an graduate and/or postgraduate PhD program in Geological Engineering.
What Geological Engineering Students LearnTopics and concepts that are covered and the overall approach or focus taken in studying Geological Engineering.
Research in Geological EngineeringResearch areas, topics, interests projects in Geological Engineering.
Career and Employment Opportunities in Geological EngineeringProfessions or occupations available to graduates in Geological Engineering and links to employment resources.







About Geological EngineeringGeological engineering is similar to geotechnical engineering.  It is also related to mining and water resources engineering.
Programs Related to Geological Engineering
Engineering

Categories Related to Geological Engineering
Applied Sciences
Engineering and Technology


homeuniversitiescollegesprogramsstudent infograduationemploymentnews
















    Custom Search
  



Copyright 2021 - Hecterra Publishing Inc. - Privacy Statement - Terms of Service




