























 
Bachelor's in Geological Engineering Degree Online & On Campus | University of North Dakota












 Skip to main content



Open Menu

Close Menu

University of North Dakota

Open Search

Close Search




University of North Dakota

Info For

Admitted Students
Current Students
Families of Current Students
Faculty & Staff
Alumni



Logins

Email
Blackboard
Campus Connection
Employee Self-Service
Hawk Central
Degree Map
Zoom



Directory
Search
Search
Submit











Academics
Admissions
Student Life
Research
Athletics
Majors & Programs
About





Menu
University of North Dakota


Academics
Admissions
Student Life
Research
Athletics
Majors & Programs
About



Request Info
Visit
Apply
Search

Search
Submit









Request Info
Visit
Apply





Search
Submit




 







Home

Program Finder
Geological Engineering (B.S.)
print
Print Page







Bachelor's in Geological Engineering Degree
Bachelor of Science (B.S.)

Worldwide travel, advanced laboratories, hands-on equipment and small class sizes.
                        Not exactly a rocky road.
UND geological engineering students receive top-notch instruction in small classes.
                        We're also proud to offer the only online Geological Engineering degree in the nation!




Program type:
Major


Format:
On Campus or Online


Est. time to complete:
4 years


Credit hours:
128




Geological Engineering (B.S.)
RequirementsCosts & AidHow to Apply





Request Information









Why earn a Geological Engineering degree?





Application Deadlines


Fall:
Aug. 15


Spring:
Dec. 15


Summer:
May 1




 
If you're an international student, refer to the international application process for deadlines.





Geological engineering is a hybrid field. It applies geology to engineering problems
                                    and engineering to geological problems. The field is broad and diverse. Geological
                                    engineers work with engineers and scientists of many sorts. But, overall, all geological
                                    engineers are focused on the safe use of natural resources and protecting people and
                                    property from harm caused by geological forces. Geological engineering is a hybrid
                                    field. It involves applying geology to engineering problems and engineering to geological
                                    problems. The field is broad and diverse, and geological engineers work with engineers
                                    and scientists of many sorts. Geological engineers are focused on the safe production
                                    and use of natural resources, on building and construction projects of many sorts,
                                    and on protecting people, property, and the environment from harm caused by human
                                    or natural forces.
Geological Engineering Program Specializations
Besides a comprehensive and high-quality program, we offer four unique opportunities
                                    for undergraduate geological engineering students who choose to specialize:

A petroleum concentration includes coursework designed to prepare students for employment
                                       in the petroleum industry while they complete their B.S. in Geological Engineering.
A geotechnical concentration prepares students for a career in goetechnical engineering
                                       after they complete their bachelor's degree in Geological Engineering.
A water resources concentration provides a strong background in hydrogeology, water
                                       resource production, groundwater contamination and remediation, and water quality
                                       and lab analyses.
A combined program allows students to earn a master's degree in addition to a bachelor's at an accelerated
                                       pace.

-



ABET Accredited Program
This bachelor's degree program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET. Accreditation is a critical factor to consider if you plan to pursue a license as
                                    a Professional Engineer.









On-Campus or Online Geological Engineering Degree



Satisfy the eligibility requirement to sit for the NCEES Fundamentals of Engineering
                                    (FE) examination. Accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, passing the FE exam is required as the first step to pursue a license as a Professional
                                    Engineer in all 50 states.


Gain access to the Wilson M. Laird Core and Sample Library, a vast resource containing 40,000 cores from nearly every oil well drilled in North
                                    Dakota.


The F.D. Holland Jr. Geology Library is one of the largest geoscience libraries in
                                    the upper Midwest.


Generous scholarship support available and excellent instructors with a wide range
                                    of backgrounds.


Smallest class sizes of any engineering discipline at UND.


This flexible online degree allows students to continue to work and keep up with personal
                                    obligations.









What can I do with a Geological Engineering degree?





101k

                                           Median annual salary for mining and geological engineers, 2023 
                                          
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics





Graduates of UND's geological engineering program play critical roles in many industries,
                                    including mining, energy exploration, education and more. Geological engineers are
                                    in demand in careers such as:

Environmental engineering
Geological engineering
Petroleum geologist
Hydrogeology
Remote sensing/GIS
Mining
Mapping and surveying
Teaching

Geological Engineering Major Skills
A Geological Engineering degree gives you the strategic skills you need, including:

Geology
Geographic Information Systems
Geotechnical Engineering
Soil Science
Geologic Mapping
ArcGIS (GIS Software)

Geological Engineering alumni have gone on to a variety of successful careers with:

American Engineering Test, Inc.
Barr Engineering Co.
Center for Energy and Environment
Alaska Department of Fish and Game
Archaeological Research, Inc.
BJ Services Company










Geological Engineering Degree Courses


Structural Geology

GEOL 330. Structural Geology.  3 Credits.

Mechanics of rock deformation, analysis of rock structures, preparation and interpretation of geologic maps and cross sections showing structural and tectonic features. Includes laboratory.  Prerequisite:   GEOL 320 or GEOE 301 and PHYS 211 or PHYS 251.  S.






Engineering Economy

ENGR 460. Engineering Economy.  3 Credits.

Evaluation of the economic merits of alternative solutions in engineering decision making. Evaluations emphasize the time value of money. Cost & benefit estimations, depreciation methods, taxes, and different analyses techniques such as present worth analysis, rate of return analysis, benefit-cost ratio analysis, etc. are covered.  Prerequisite:  CEM majors and junior standing, or permission of instructor. Prerequisite or Corequisite:  MATH 165. F,S,SS.






Geological Engineering Design

GEOE 484. Geological Engineering Design.  3 Credits.

The first of a two-course sequence in geological engineering design. Define the design problem, establish design objectives, evaluate alternatives, specify constraints, determine a methodology, complete a formal design problem statement.  Prerequisite:  Advanced level standing in Geological  Engineering and consent of advisor.  F.






Petrophysics

GEOE 301. Petrophysics.  3 Credits.

Mineral and rock formation, identification and petrophysical properties, particularly with respect to porous rocks and their interactions with fluids.  Prerequisite:   GEOE 203. Corequisite:   GEOE 301L.  S.






Design Hydrology for Wetlands

GEOE 425. Design Hydrology for Wetlands.  3 Credits.

Principles of chemistry, geology, hydraulics, and hydrology applied to natural and constructed wetlands and other small catchments.  Prerequisite:   CHEM 121 and either CE 306/ME 306 or GEOE 417.  S.






Hydrogeology

GEOE 417. Hydrogeology.  3 Credits.

Physical and chemical aspects of groundwater movement, supply, and contamination.  Prerequisite:   MATH 165.  F.








-



Best Online Geological Engineering Bachelor's Programs



#4 Bachelors Degree Center#7 Value Colleges#10 College Values Online




UND is regarded as one of the top academic and research institutions in the nation
                                    for online engineering education. Our Geological Engineering program consistently
                                    ranks among the best for educational quality, affordability and career outcomes.
Ranking sites vary in their methodology, but are generally based on the following
                                    criterion:

Financial data such as net cost, loan default rate, and return on investment
Academic rigor including curriculum standards, accreditation status, and faculty reputation
Student gratification, retention rate, and support services
Employment rate and graduate salary










Online Geological Engineering Degree





1#
best online college in North Dakota
Intelligent


160+
online programs






UND is one of the most affordable online engineering colleges in the region. For this
                                    program, we offer the same online tuition rates regardless of your legal residency.
                                    Compare the online Geological Engineering degree cost and you’ll see UND is lower tuition than similar four-year doctoral universities.
Flexible Online Geological Engineering Classes
With asynchronous classes, you do not attend class at a set time. If you need to balance
                                    work, family, and other commitments, this flexible format allows you to learn anywhere
                                    at any time.
Depending on your instructor, you’ll learn online through:

Lesson modules
Streaming video content
Virtual libraries
Posted lectures
Online simulations

There will be times when you interact with your instructor and classmates through
                                    online discussion boards, polls, and chat rooms.
Your learning revolves around materials that can be accessed on your own time within
                                    a set time frame. However, this is not a self-paced course. You’ll have structure
                                    and deadlines.
Campus Visit
While the majority of your courses are offered online, you’ll come to campus to complete
                                    portions of the program. Here, you’ll extend and apply the knowledge you’ve learned
                                    online through hands-on activities. Our students find tremendous value in having the
                                    opportunity to personally interact with their instructors and fellow students.
SUMMER LAB REQUIREMENTS

Engineering Club for Online Students
The Society of Distance Engineering Students is a club for online engineering students.
                                          You'll have the chance to meet and work with students who study online and those who
                                          attend classes on UND's campus. Even though you might be far apart, you can still
                                          study and work together easily.


-

Top-Tier Geological Engineering Degree Online
Over a third of UND's student population is exclusively online; plus, more take a
                                    combination of online and on campus classes. You can feel reassured knowing you won't
                                    be alone in your online learning journey and you'll have resources and services tailored
                                    to your needs.No matter how you customize your online experience, you’ll get the same top-quality
                                    education as any other on campus student.

Same degree: All online programs are fully accredited by the Higher Learning Commission (HLC). Your transcript and diploma are exactly the same as our on-campus students.
Same classes: You’ll take courses from UND professors, start and end the semesters at the same time
                                       and take the same classes as a student on campus.
Real interaction: You can ask questions, get feedback and regularly connect with your professors, peers
                                       and professionals in the field.
Your own academic advisor: As an invaluable go-to, they’re focused on you, your personal success and your future
                                       career.
Free online tutoring: We're here to help you one-on-one at no cost. Plus, get access to a variety of self-help
                                       online study resources.
Unlimited academic coaching: Need support to achieve your academic goals or feeling stumped by a tough course?
                                       We'll help with everything from stress and time management to improving your memory
                                       to achieve higher test scores.
Full online access: Dig into virtual research at UND's libraries. Improve your writing skills with online
                                       help from the UND Writing Center. Get online access to career services, veteran and
                                       military services, financial services and more.
24/7 technical support: UND provides free computer, email and other technical support for all online students.
Networking opportunities: Our significant online student population means you’ll have a large pool of peers
                                       to connect with. UND has numerous online events and activities to keep you connected.

Best Online College
Our high alumni salaries and job placement rates, with affordable online tuition rates
                                    make UND a best-value university for online education. UND's breadth of online programs
                                    rivals all other nonprofit universities in the Upper Midwest making UND one of the
                                    best online schools in the region.
UND ranks among the best online colleges in the nation for:

Affordability
Student satisfaction (retention rate)
Academic quality (4-year graduate rate)
Student outcomes (20-year return on investment per Payscale.com)










FAQs
Open All Sections
Is the program accredited?(Open this section)


Yes, the undergraduate Geological Engineering program is accredited by the Engineering
                                    Accreditation Commission of ABET. Accreditation makes our program invaluable for candidates
                                    aspiring to obtain a Professional Engineer license. All UND programs are also fully
                                    accredited by the Higher Learning Commission (HLC).



How much time per week should I expect to spend on each course?(Open this section)


A typical expectation is about 3 hours of work per credit, so about 8 or 9 hours per
                                    3 credit class. Most classes will have a few hours of lecture each week and then students
                                    must be motivated to study and practice the concepts outside of class.



What is the average duration of an online Geological Engineering degree program?(Open this section)


The 128 credit hours required for completing our Geological Engineering degree program,
                                    online or on campus, are expected to take approximately four years for a full time
                                    student.



Can I switch from an online program to an on campus one if I change my mind?(Open this section)


Yes, our students have the flexibility to change the modality of their program from
                                    an online to an on campus format. Some students have decided they prefer an in person
                                    experience and moved to campus, while vice versa some students find that the online
                                    format works better for them.



Are scholarships available for online Geological Engineering students?(Open this section)


Yes, there are many scholarships available to all students, with many alumni sponsored
                                    scholarships specifically for each discipline. In geological engineering, a famous
                                    benefactor in the oil and gas business Harold Hamm has made many scholarships available.
                                    Most scholarships are awarded based on GPA, meeting a minimum course load, or other
                                    various criteria depending on the requests of the donor.



















Leaders in Engineering
Helping you fulfill your aspirations is our highest priority. We'll work with you
                                    to design a custom educational plan that meets your goals.






 







Request Information





Explore More Options

                           Looking to connect with the college or find a similar degree?
                           




College of Engineering & Mines
Find Similar Degrees












        We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience.
      

        By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us
        to set cookies, Privacy Information.
      


I Agree


Exit Site
Back to Top







Ready to Enroll?



Request Information
Schedule a Visit
Apply Now











UND.info@UND.edu
701.777.3000




Instagram


Facebook


YouTube


LinkedIn


X







Contact UND
Campus Map
Events Calendar
Diversity & Inclusion




Explore Programs
Employment
Make a Gift
Campus Safety (SafeUND)









University of North Dakota
© 2024 University of North Dakota - Grand Forks, ND - Member of ND University System

 Accessibility & Website Feedback
Terms of Use & Privacy
Notice of Nondiscrimination
Student Disclosure Information
Title IX











 ©

         		  UND.info@UND.edu
         		  701.777.3000 | 1.800.CALL.UND
         		  UND.edu/programs
         		

