Engineering Geology
This page intentionally left blank
Engineering Geology
Second Edition
F. G. Bell
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA01803, USA
First edition 1993
Second edition 2007
Copyright © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333;
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material.
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons
or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use
or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent
verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN-13: 978-0-7506-8077-6
ISBN-10: 0-7506-8077-6
For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications visit our
website at http://books.elsevier.com
Printed and bound in Great Britain
07 08 09 10 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Preface
As noted in the Preface to the first edition, engineering geology can be defined as the appli-
cation of Geology to engineering practice. In other words, it is concerned with those geolog-
ical factors that influence the location, design, construction and maintenance of engineering
works. Accordingly, it draws on a number of geological disciplines such as geomorphology,
structural geology, sedimentology, petrology and stratigraphy. In addition, engineering geol-
ogy involves hydrogeology and some understanding of rock and soil mechanics.
Similar to the first edition, this edition too is written for undergraduate and post-graduate stu-
dents of engineering geology. It is hoped that this will also be of value to those involved in
the profession, especially at the earlier stages of their careers. However, it is aimed at not
just engineering geologists but also at those in civil and mining engineering, water engineer-
ing, quarrying and, to a lesser extent, architecture, planning, surveying and building. In other
words, those who deal with the ground should know something about it.
No single textbook can cover all the needs of the variety of readers who may use it.
Therefore, a list of books is suggested for further reading, and references are provided for
those who want to pursue some aspect of the subject matter to greater depth. However,
some background knowledge also is assumed. Obviously, students of geology will have done
much more reading on geology than the basic geological material covered in this book. They
presumably will have done or will do some reading on soil mechanics and rock mechanics.
On the other hand, those with an engineering background will have read some soil and rock
mechanics, but need some basic geology, hopefully, this book will meet their needs.
Moreover, any book will reflect the background of its author and his or her view of the sub-
ject. However, this author has attempted to give a balanced overview of the subject.
The text has been revised and extended to take account of some subjects that were not dealt
with in the first edition. Also, some of the chapters have been rearranged. Hopefully, this
should have improved the text.
The author gratefully acknowledges all those who have given permission to publish material
from other sources. Individual acknowledgements are given throughout the text.
v
This page intentionally left blank
Contents
1. Rock Types and Stratigraphy
Igneous Rocks 1
Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks 15
Sedimentary Rocks 25
Stratigraphy and Stratification 38
2. Geological Structures
Folds 47
Faults 55
Discontinuities 61
3. Surface Processes
Weathering 77
Movement of Slopes 88
Fluvial Processes 100
Karst Topography and Underground Drainage 111
Glaciation 114
Wind Action and Desert Landscapes 126
Coasts and Shorelines 135
Storm Surges and Tsunamis 144
4. Groundwater Conditions and Supply
The Origin and Occurrence of Groundwater 151
The Water Table or Phreatic Surface 151
Aquifers, Aquicludes and Aquitards 152
Capillary Movement in Soil 156
Porosity and Permeability 157
Flow through Soils and Rocks 165
Pore Pressures, Total Pressures and Effective Pressures 169
Critical Hydraulic Gradient, Quick Conditions and
Hydraulic Uplift Phenomena 172
vii
C o n t e n t s
Groundwater Exploration 173
Assessment of Field Permeability 177
Assessment of Flow in the Field 180
Groundwater Quality 183
Wells 186
Safe Yield 189
Artificial Recharge 190
Groundwater Pollution 191
5. Description, Properties and Behaviour of Soils and Rocks
Soil Classification 201
Coarse Soils 210
Silts and Loess 213
Clay Deposits 217
Tropical Soils 227
Dispersive Soils 229
Soils of Arid Regions 232
Tills and Other Glacially Associated Deposits 235
Frost Action in Soil 242
Organic Soils: Peat 247
Description of Rocks and Rock Masses 249
Engineering Aspects of Igneous and Metamorphic Rocks 254
Engineering Behaviour of Sedimentary Rocks 259
6. Geological Materials Used in Construction
Building or Dimension Stone 277
Roofing and Facing Materials 287
Armourstone 289
Crushed Rock: Concrete Aggregate 291
Road Aggregate 294
Gravels and Sands 297
Lime, Cement and Plaster 301
Clays and Clay Products 302
7. Site Investigation
Desk Study and Preliminary Reconnaissance 311
Site Exploration – Direct Methods 318
In Situ Testing 334
viii
Contents
Field Instrumentation 344
Geophysical Methods: Indirect Site Exploration 346
Maps for Engineering Purposes 365
Geographical Information Systems 369
8. Geology, Planning and Development
Introduction 377
Geological Hazards, Risk Assessment and Planning 380
Hazard Maps 381
Natural Geological Hazards and Planning 383
Geological-Related Hazards Induced by Man 420
Derelict and Contaminated Land 446
9. Geology and Construction
Open Excavation 453
Tunnels and Tunnelling 470
Underground Caverns 496
Shafts and Raises 499
Reservoirs 501
Dams and Dam Sites 507
Highways 523
Railroads 536
Bridges 537
Foundations for Buildings 539
Suggestions for Further Reading 551
References 559
Index 575
ix
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 1
Rock Types and Stratigraphy
According to their origin, rocks are divided into three groups, namely, the igneous,
metamorphic and sedimentary rocks.
Igneous Rocks
Igneous rocks are formed when hot molten rock material called magma solidifies. Magmas
are developed when melting occurs either within or beneath the Earth’s crust, that is, in the
upper mantle. They comprise hot solutions of several liquid phases, the most conspicuous
of which is a complex silicate phase. Thus, igneous rocks are composed principally of silicate
minerals. Furthermore, of the silicate minerals, six families – the olivines [(Mg,Fe) SiO ],
2 4
the pyroxenes [e.g. augite, (Ca, Mg, Fe, Al) (Al,Si) O ], the amphiboles [e.g. hornblende,
2 2 6
(Ca,Na,Mg,Fe,Al) (Al,Si) O (OH) ], the micas [e.g. muscovite, KAl (AlSi ) (O,F) ; and
7-8 8 22 2 2 210 2
biotite, K(Mg,Fe) (AlSi )O (OH,F) ], the feldspars (e.g. orthoclase, KAlSi O ; albite,
2 3 10 2 3 8
NaAlSi O ; and anorthite, CaAl Si O ) and the silica minerals (e.g. quartz, SiO ) – are quan-
3 8 2 2 8 2
titatively by far the most important constituents. Figure 1.1 shows the approximate distribution
of these minerals in the commonest igneous rocks.
Igneous rocks may be divided into intrusive and extrusive types, according to their mode of
occurrence. In the former type, the magma crystallizes within the Earth’s crust, whereas in the
latter, it solidifies at the surface, having erupted as lavas and/or pyroclasts from a volcano. The
intrusions have been exposed at the surface by erosion. They have been further subdivided on
the basis of their size, that is, into major (plutonic) and minor (hypabyssal) categories.
Igneous Intrusions
The form that intrusions adopt may be influenced by the structure of the host or country rocks.
This applies particularly to minor intrusions.
Dykes are discordant igneous intrusions, that is, they traverse their host rocks at an angle
and are steeply dipping (Fig. 1.2). As a consequence, their surface outcrop is little affected
by topography and, in fact, they tend to strike a straight course. Dykes range in width up to
1
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.1
Approximate mineral compositions of the more common types of igneous rocks, e.g. granite approximately 40% orthoclase,
33% quartz, 13% plagioclase, 9% mica and 5% hornblende (plutonic types without brackets, volcanic equivalents in brackets).
Figure 1.2
Dyke on the south side of the Isle of Skye, Scotland.
2
Chapter 1
several tens of metres but their average width is on the order of a few metres. The length
of their surface outcrop also varies; for example, the Cleveland Dyke in the north of England
can be traced over some 200 km. Dykelets may extend from and run parallel to large dykes,
and irregular offshoots may branch away from large dykes. Dykes do not usually have an
upward termination, although they may have acted as feeders for lava flows and sills. They
often occur along faults, which provide a natural path of escape for the injected magma.
Most dykes are of basaltic composition. However, dykes may be multiple or composite.
Multiple dykes are formed by two or more injections of the same material that occur at
different times. A composite dyke involves two or more injections of magma of different
composition.
Sills, like dykes, are parallel-sided igneous intrusions that can occur over relatively extensive
areas. Their thickness, however, can vary. Unlike dykes, they are injected in an approxi-
mately horizontal direction, although their attitude may be subsequently altered by folding.
When sills form in a series of sedimentary rocks, the magma is injected along bedding planes
(Fig. 1.3). Nevertheless, an individual sill may transgress upwards from one horizon to
another. Because sills are intruded along bedding planes, they are said to be concordant, and
their outcrop is similar to that of the host rocks. Sills may be fed from dykes, and small dykes
Figure 1.3
The Whin Sill, Northumberland, England.
3
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
may arise from sills. Most sills are composed of basic igneous material. Sills may also be
multiple or composite in character.
The major intrusions include batholiths, stocks and bosses. Batholiths are very large in size
and are generally of granitic or granodioritic composition. Indeed, many batholiths have an
immense surface exposure. For instance, the Coast Range batholith of Alaska and British
Columbia can be traced over 1000 km in length and over approximately 130 to 190 km in
width. Batholiths are associated with orogenic regions. They often appear to have no visible
base, and their contacts are well-defined and dip steeply outwards. Bosses are distinguished
from stocks in that they have a more or less circular outcrop. Both their surface exposures
are of limited size, frequently less than 100 km2. They may represent upward extensions from
deep-seated batholiths.
Certain structures are associated with granite massifs, tending to be best developed at the
margins. For example, particles of elongate habit may be aligned with their long axes paral-
lel to each other. Most joints and minor faults in batholiths possess a relationship with the
shape of the intrusion. Fractures are developed in the solidified margins of a plutonic mass
and may have been filled with material from the interior when it was still liquid. Cross joints
or Q joints tend to radiate from the centre of the massif. They are crossed approximately at
right angles by steeply dipping joints termed longitudinal or S joints. Pegmatites or aplites
(see the following text) may be injected along both types of joints mentioned. Diagonal joints
are orientated at 45∞t o Q and S joints. Flat-lying joints may be developed during or after for-
mation of the batholith and they may be distinguished as primary and secondary, respec-
tively. Normal faults and thrusts occur in the marginal zones of large intrusions and the
adjacent country rocks.
Volcanic Activity and Extrusive Rocks
Volcanic zones are associated with the boundaries of the crustal plates (Fig. 1.4). Plates can
be largely continental, oceanic, or both. Oceanic crust is composed of basaltic material,
whereas continental crust varies from granitic in the upper part to basaltic in the lower.
At destructive plate margins, oceanic plates are overridden by continental plates. The descent
of the oceanic plate, together with any associated sediments, into zones of higher tempera-
ture leads to melting and the formation of magmas. Such magmas vary in composition, but
some, such as andesitic or rhyolitic magma, may be richer in silica, which means that they
are more viscous and, therefore, do not liberate gas so easily. The latter type of magmas are
often responsible for violent eruptions. In contrast, at constructive plate margins, where
plates are diverging, the associated volcanic activity is a consequence of magma formation
in the lower crust or upper mantle. The magma is of basaltic composition, which is less
4
Chapter 1
Figure 1.4
Distribution of the active volcanoes in the world. S, submarine eruptions.
viscous than andesitic or rhyolitic magma. Hence, there is relatively little explosive activity
and the associated lava flows are more mobile. However, certain volcanoes, for example,
those of the Hawaiian Islands, are located in the centres of plates. Obviously, these volca-
noes are unrelated to plate boundaries. They owe their origins to hot spots in the Earth’s crust
located above rising mantle plumes. Most volcanic material is of basaltic composition.
Volcanic activity is a surface manifestation of a disordered state within the Earth’s interior that
has led to the melting of material and the consequent formation of magma. This magma trav-
els to the surface, where it is extravasated either from a fissure or a central vent. In some
cases, instead of flowing from the volcano as lava, the magma is exploded into the air by the
rapid escape of the gases from within it. The fragments produced by explosive activity are
known collectively as pyroclasts.
Eruptions from volcanoes are spasmodic rather than continuous. Between eruptions, activity
may still be witnessed in the form of steam and vapours issuing from small vents named
fumaroles or solfataras. But, in some volcanoes, even this form of surface manifestation
ceases, and such a dormant state may continue for centuries. To all intents and purposes,
these volcanoes appear extinct. In old age, the activity of a volcano becomes limited to emis-
sions of gases from fumaroles and hot water from geysers and hot springs.
Steam may account for over 90% of the gases emitted during a volcanic eruption. Other
gases present include carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, sulphur trioxide,
5
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
hydrogen sulphide, hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride. Small quantities of methane,
ammonia, nitrogen, hydrogen thiocyanate, carbonyl sulphide, silicon tetrafluoride, ferric chlo-
ride, aluminium chloride, ammonium chloride and argon have also been noted in volcanic
gases. It has often been found that hydrogen chloride is, next to steam, the major gas pro-
duced during an eruption but that the sulphurous gases take over this role in the later stages.
At high pressures, gas is held in solution, but as the pressure falls, gas is released by the
magma. The rate at which it escapes determines the explosivity of the eruption. An explosive
eruption occurs when, because of its high viscosity (to a large extent, the viscosity is gov-
erned by the silica content), the magma cannot readily allow the escape of gas until the pres-
sure that it is under is lowered sufficiently to allow this to occur. This occurs at or near the
surface. The degree of explosivity is only secondarily related to the amount of gas the magma
holds. On the other hand, volatiles escape quietly from very fluid magmas.
Pyroclasts may consist of fragments of lava that were exploded on eruption, of fragments of
pre-existing solidified lava or pyroclasts, or of fragments of country rock that, in both latter
instances, have been blown from the neck of a volcano.
The size of pyroclasts varies enormously. It is dependent on the viscosity of the magma, the
violence of the explosive activity, the amount of gas coming out of solution during the flight
of the pyroclast, and the height to which it is thrown. The largest blocks thrown into the air
may weigh over 100 tonnes, whereas the smallest consist of very fine ash that may take
years to fall back to the Earth’s surface. The largest pyroclasts are referred to as volcanic
bombs. These consist of clots of lava or of fragments of wall rock.
The term lapilli is applied to pyroclastic material that has a diameter varying from approxi-
mately 10 to 50 mm (Fig. 1.5). Cinder or scoria is irregular-shaped material of lapilli size.
It usually is glassy and fairly to highly vesicular.
The finest pyroclastic material is called ash. Much more ash is produced on eruption of acidic
than basic magmas. Acidic igneous rocks contain over 65% silica, whereas basic igneous
rocks contain between 45 and 55%. Those rocks that have a silica content between acid
and basic are referred to as intermediate, and those with less than 45% silica are termed
ultrabasic. As mentioned, the reason for the difference in explosivity is because acidic material
is more viscous than basic or basaltic lava.
Beds of ash commonly show lateral variation as well as vertical. In other words, with increas-
ing distance from the parent vent, the ash becomes finer and, in the second case, because
the heavier material falls first, ashes frequently exhibit graded bedding, with coarser material
occurring at the base of a bed, and becoming finer towards the top. Reverse grading may
6
Chapter 1
Figure 1.5
Lapilli near Crater Lake caldera, Oregon.
occur as a consequence of an increase in the violence of eruption or changes in wind veloc-
ity. The spatial distribution of ash is influenced by wind direction, and deposits on the leeward
side of a volcano may be much more extensive than on the windward. Indeed, they may be
virtually absent from the latter side.
After pyroclastic material has fallen back to the ground surface, it eventually becomes
indurated. It then is described as tuff. According to the material of which tuff is composed,
distinction can be drawn between ash tuff, pumiceous tuff and tuff breccia. Tuffs are usually
well bedded, and the deposits of individual eruptions may be separated by thin bands of fossil
soil or old erosion surfaces. Pyroclast deposits that accumulate beneath the sea are often
mixed with a varying amount of sediment and are referred to as tuffites. Rocks that consist
of fragments of volcanic ejectamenta set in a fine-grained groundmass are referred to as
agglomerate or volcanic breccia, depending on whether the fragments are rounded or angular,
respectively.
When clouds or showers of intensely heated, incandescent lava spray fall to the ground, they
weld together to become welded tuff. In other cases, because the particles become intimately
fused with each other, they attain a largely pseudo-viscous state, especially in the deeper
7
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.6
Nuee ardente erupting from Mt. St. Helens in May 1980, Washington State.
parts of the deposit. The term ignimbrite is used to describe these rocks. If ignimbrites are
deposited on a steep slope, they begin to flow, and they resemble lava flows. Ignimbrites are
associated with nuées ardentes (Fig. 1.6).
Lavas are emitted from volcanoes at temperatures only slightly above their freezing points.
During the course of their flow, the temperature falls until solidification takes place some-
where between 600 and 900∞C, depending on their chemical composition and gas content.
Basic lavas solidify at higher temperatures than do acidic ones.
Generally, flow within a lava stream is laminar. The rate of flow of lava is determined by the
gradient of the slope down which it moves and by its viscosity that, in turn, is governed by its
composition, temperature and volatile content. Because of their lower viscosity, basic lavas
flow much faster and further than do acid lavas. Indeed, the former type has been known to
travel at speeds of up to 80 km h- 1.
The upper surface of a recently solidified lava flow develops a hummocky, ropy (termed pahoe-
hoe); rough, fragmental, clinkery, spiny (termed aa); or blocky structure (Fig. 1.7a and b).
The pahoehoe is the most fundamental type, however, some way downslope from the vent,
8
Chapter 1
Figure 1.7
(a) Ropy or pahoehoe lava, Craters of the Moon, Idaho.
it may give way to aa or block lava. In other cases, aa or block lava, may be traceable into
the vent. The surface of lava solidifies before the main body of the flow beneath. Pipes,
vesicle trains or spiracles may be developed in the lava, depending on the amount of gas
given off, the resistance offered by the lava and the speed at which it flows. Pipes are
tubes that project upwards from the base and are usually several centimetres in length and
a centimetre or less in diameter. Vesicles are small spherical openings formed by gas.
Vesicle trains form when gas action has not been strong enough to produce pipes.
Spiracles are openings formed by explosive disruption of the still-fluid lava by gas gener-
ated beneath it. Large flows are fed by a complex of streams beneath the surface crust so
that when the supply of lava is exhausted, the stream of liquid may drain away leaving a
tunnel behind.
Thin lava flows are broken by joints that may run either at right angles or parallel to the direc-
tion of flow. Joints do occur with other orientations but are much less common. Those joints
that are normal to the lava surface usually display a polygonal arrangement, but only rarely
do they give rise to columnar jointing. These joints develop as the lava cools. First, primary
joints form, from which secondary joints arise, and so it continues.
9
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.7, cont’d
(b) Clinkery or aa lava, Craters of the Moon, Idaho.
Typical columnar jointing is developed in thick flows of basalt (Fig. 1.8). The columns in
columnar jointing are interrupted by cross joints that may be either flat or saucer-shaped. The
latter may be convex up or down. These are not to be confused with platy joints that are
developed in lavas as they become more viscous on cooling, so that slight shearing occurs
along flow planes.
Texture of Igneous Rocks
The degree of crystallinity is one of the most important items of texture. An igneous rock
may be composed of an aggregate of crystals, of natural glass, or of crystals and glass in
varying proportions. This depends on the rate of cooling and composition of the magma
on the one hand and the environment under which the rock developed on the other. If a
rock is completely composed of crystalline mineral material, it is described as holocrys-
talline. Most rocks are holocrystalline. Conversely, rocks that consist entirely of glassy
material are referred to as holohyaline. The terms hypo-, hemi- or merocrystalline
are given to rocks that are made up of intermediate proportions of crystalline and glassy
materials.
10
Chapter 1
Figure 1.8
Columnar jointing in basalt, Giant’s Causeway, Northern Ireland.
When referring to the size of individual crystals, they are described as cryptocrystalline if
they can just be seen under the highest resolution of the microscope or as microcrystalline
if they can be seen at a lower magnification. These two types, together with glassy rocks, are
collectively described as aphanitic, which means that the individual minerals cannot be
distinguished with the naked eye. When the minerals of which a rock is composed are mega-
or macroscopic, that is, they can be recognized with the unaided eye, it is described as
phanerocrystalline. Three grades of megascopic texture are usually distinguished, namely,
fine-grained, medium-grained and coarse-grained, the limits being under 1-mm diameter,
between 1- and 5-mm diameter, and over 5-mm diameter, respectively.
A granular texture is one in which there is no glassy material and the individual crystals have a
grain-like appearance. If the minerals are of approximately the same size, the texture is
described as equigranular, whereas if this is not the case, it is referred to as inequigranular.
Equigranular textures are more typically found in plutonic igneous rocks. Many volcanic rocks
and rocks that occur in dykes and sills, in particular, display inequigranular textures, the most
important type being the porphyritic texture. In this texture, large crystals or phenocrysts are set
in a fine-grained groundmass. A porphyritic texture may be distinguished as macro- or micro-
porphyritic, according to whether or not it may be observed with the unaided eye, respectively.
11
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The most important rock-forming minerals are often referred to as felsic and mafic, depending
on whether they are light or dark coloured, respectively. Felsic minerals include quartz, mus-
covite, feldspars and feldspathoids, whereas olivines, pyroxenes, amphiboles and biotite
are mafic minerals. The colour index of a rock is an expression of the percentage of mafic
minerals that it contains. Four categories have been distinguished:
(1) leucocratic rocks, which contain less than 30% dark minerals
(2) mesocratic rocks, which contain between 30 and 60% dark minerals
(3) melanocratic rocks, which contain between 60 and 90% dark minerals and
(4) hypermelanic rocks, which contain over 90% dark minerals
Usually, acidic rocks are leucocratic, whereas basic and ultrabasic rocks are melanocratic
and hypermelanic, respectively.
Igneous Rock Types
Granites and granodiorites are the commonest rocks of the plutonic association. They are
characterized by a coarse-grained, holocrystalline, granular texture. Although the term gran-
ite lacks precision, normal granite has been defined as a rock in which quartz forms more
than 5% and less than 50% of the quarfeloids (quartz, feldspar, feldspathoid content), potash
feldspar constitutes 50 to 95% of the total feldspar content, the plagioclase is sodi-calcic, and
the mafites form more than 5% and less than 50% of the total constituents (Fig. 1.1).
In granodiorite, the plagioclase is oligoclase or andesine and is at least double the amount of
potash feldspar present, the latter forming 8 to 20% of the rock. The plagioclases are nearly
always euhedral (minerals completely bounded by crystal faces), as may be biotite and
hornblende. These minerals are set in a quartz–potash feldspar matrix.
The term pegmatite refers to coarse or very-coarse-grained rocks that are formed during the
last stages of crystallization from a magma. Pegmatitic facies, although commonly associated
with granitic rocks, are found in association with all types of plutonic rocks. Pegmatites occur
as dykes, sills, veins, lenses or irregular pockets in the host rocks, with which they rarely have
sharp contacts (Fig. 1.9).
Aplites occur as veins, usually several tens of millimetres thick, in granites, although like
pegmatites they are found in association with other plutonic rocks. They possess a fine-
grained, equigranular texture. There is no important chemical difference between aplite and
pegmatite, and it is assumed that they both have crystallized from residual magmatic
solutions.
12
Chapter 1
Figure 1.9
Pegmatite vein cutting through Shap Granite, Cumbria, England.
Rhyolites are acidic extrusive rocks that are commonly associated with andesites. They
are generally regarded as representing the volcanic equivalent of granite. They are
usually leucocratic and sometimes exhibit flow banding. Rhyolites may be holocrystalline,
but very often they contain an appreciable amount of glass. They are frequently por-
phyritic, the phenocrysts varying in size and abundance. The phenocrysts occur in a
glassy, cryptocrystalline or microcrystalline groundmass. Vesicles are usually found in
these rocks.
Acidic rocks occurring in dykes or sills are often porphyritic, quartz porphyry being the
commonest example. Quartz porphyry is similar in composition to rhyolite.
Syenites are plutonic rocks that have a granular texture and consist of potash feldspar, a sub-
ordinate amount of sodic plagioclase and some mafic minerals, usually biotite or hornblende.
13
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Diorite has been defined as an intermediate plutonic, granular rock composed of plagioclase
and hornblende, although at times the latter may be partially or completely replaced by biotite
and/or pyroxene. Plagioclase, in the form of oligoclase and andesine, is the dominant
feldspar. If orthoclase is present, it acts only as an accessory mineral.
Trachytes and andesites are the fine-grained equivalents of syenites and diorites, respec-
tively. Andesite is the commoner of the two types. Trachytes are extrusive rocks, which are
often porphyritic, in which alkali feldspars are dominant. Most phenocrysts are composed
of alkali feldspar and, to a lesser extent, of alkali–lime feldspar. More rarely, biotite, horn-
blende and/or augite may form phenocrysts. The groundmass is usually a holocrystalline
aggregate of sanidine (a high-temperature form of orthoclase) laths. Andesites are com-
monly porphyritic, with a holocrystalline groundmass. Plagioclase (oligoclase-andesine),
which is the dominant feldspar, forms most of the phenocrysts. The plagioclases of the
groundmass are more sodic than those of the phenocrysts. Sanidine and anorthoclase
[(Na,K)AlSi O ] rarely form phenocrysts but the former mineral does occur in the ground-
3 8
mass and may encircle some of the plagioclase phenocrysts. Hornblende is the common-
est of the ferro-magnesian minerals and may occur as phenocrysts or in the groundmass,
as may biotite and pyroxene.
Gabbros and norites are plutonic igneous rocks with granular textures. They are dark in
colour. Plagioclase, commonly labradorite, is usually the dominant mineral in gabbros and
norites, but bytownite also occurs. The pyroxenes found in gabbros are typically augite,
diopsidic augite and diallage. They are usually subhedral (some crystal faces developed) or
anhedral (no crystal faces developed). Norites, unlike gabbros, contain orthopyroxenes
instead of clinopyroxenes, hypersthene being the principle pyroxene.
Basalts are the extrusive equivalents of gabbros and norites, and are composed princi-
pally of calcic plagioclase and pyroxene in roughly equal amounts, or there may be
an excess of plagioclase. It is by far the most important type of extrusive rock. Basalts
also occur in dykes, cone sheets, sills and volcanic plugs. Basalts exhibit a great variety
of textures and may be holocrystalline or merocrystalline, equigranular or macro- or
microporphyritic.
Dolerites are found in minor intrusions. They consist primarily of plagioclase, usually
labradorite, and pyroxene, usually augite (Fig. 1.10). The plagioclase may occur as phe-
nocrysts, in addition to being one of the principal minerals in the groundmass. Dolerites are
fine-to-medium grained. They are usually equigranular but, as they grade towards basalts,
they tend to become porphyritic. Nevertheless, phenocrysts generally constitute less than
10% of the rock. The groundmass consists of plagioclase laths, small anhedral pyroxenes
and minor amounts of ores.
14
Chapter 1
Figure 1.10
Thin section of dolerite from Harrisburg, South Africa, showing patches of clay minerals and some microfracturing.
Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic rocks are derived from pre-existing rock types and have undergone miner-
alogical, textural and structural changes. These changes have been brought about by
changes that have taken place in the physical and chemical environments in which the
rocks existed. The processes responsible for change give rise to progressive transforma-
tion in rock that takes place in the solid state. The changing conditions of temperature
and/or pressure are the primary agents causing metamorphic reactions in rocks. Some
minerals are stable over limited temperature–pressure conditions, which means that when
these limits are exceeded mineralogical adjustment has to be made to establish equilibrium
with the new environment.
When metamorphism occurs, there is usually little alteration in the bulk chemical composition
of the rocks involved, that is, with the exception of water and volatile constituents such as
carbon dioxide, little material is lost or gained. This type of alteration is described as an iso-
chemical change. In contrast, allochemical changes are brought about by metasomatic
processes that introduce material into or remove it from the rocks they affect. Metasomatic
changes are brought about by hot gases or solutions permeating through rocks.
15
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Metamorphic reactions are influenced by the presence of fluids or gases in the pores of the
rocks concerned. For instance, due to the low conductivity of rocks, pore fluids may act as a
medium of heat transfer. Not only does water act as an agent of transfer in metamorphism,
but it also acts as a catalyst in many chemical reactions. It is a constituent in many minerals
in metamorphic rocks of low and medium grade. Grade refers to the range of temperature
under which metamorphism occurred.
Two major types of metamorphism may be distinguished on the basis of geological setting.
One type is of local extent, whereas the other extends over a large area. The first type refers
to thermal or contact metamorphism, and the latter refers to regional metamorphism. Another
type of metamorphism is dynamic metamorphism, which is brought about by increasing
stress. However, some geologists have argued that this is not a metamorphic process since
it brings about deformation rather than transformation.
Metamorphic Textures and Structures
Most deformed metamorphic rocks possess some kind of preferred orientation. Preferred ori-
entations may be exhibited as mesoscopic linear or planar structures that allow the rocks to
split more easily in one direction than in others. One of the most familiar examples is cleav-
age in slate; a similar type of structure in metamorphic rocks of higher grade is schistosity.
Foliation comprises a segregation of particular minerals into inconstant bands or contiguous
lenticles that exhibit a common parallel orientation.
Slaty cleavage is probably the most familiar type of preferred orientation and occurs in rocks
of low metamorphic grade (see also Chapter 2). It is characteristic of slates and phyllites
(Fig. 1.11). It is independent of bedding, which it commonly intersects at high angles; and it
reflects a highly developed preferred orientation of minerals, particularly of those belonging
to the mica family.
Strain-slip cleavage occurs in fine-grained metamorphic rocks, where it may maintain a reg-
ular, though not necessarily constant, orientation. This regularity suggests some simple rela-
tionship between the cleavage and movement under regionally homogeneous stress in the
final phase of deformation.
Harker (1939) maintained that schistosity develops in a rock when it is subjected to increased
temperatures and stress that involves its reconstitution, which is brought about by localized
solution of mineral material and recrystallization. In all types of metamorphisms, the growth
of new crystals takes place in an attempt to minimize stress. When recrystallization occurs
under conditions that include shearing stress, a directional element is imparted to the newly
16
Chapter 1
Figure 1.11
An old quarry in slate where extraction made use of the near-vertical cleavage, Nant Peris, North Wales.
formed rock. Minerals are arranged in parallel layers along the direction normal to the plane
of shearing stress, giving the rock its schistose character (Fig. 1.12a and b). The most impor-
tant minerals responsible for the development of schistosity are those that possess an acic-
ular, flaky or tabular habit, the micas (e.g. muscovite) being the principal family involved. The
more abundant flaky and tabular minerals are in such rocks, the more pronounced is the
schistosity.
Foliation in a metamorphic rock is a very conspicuous feature, consisting of parallel bands or
tabular lenticles formed of contrasting mineral assemblages such as quartz–feldspar and
biotite–hornblende (Fig. 1.13a and b). It is characteristic of gneisses. This parallel orientation
agrees with the direction of schistosity, if any is present in nearby rocks. Foliation, therefore,
would seem to be related to the same system of stress and strain responsible for the devel-
opment of schistosity. However, the influence of stress becomes less at higher temperatures
17
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
a
b
Figure 1.12
(a) Mica schist in which quartz and muscovite are segregated. Qu, quartz; M, muscovite (x 24). (b) Mica schist,
northeast of Rhiconich, north of Scotland.
18
Chapter 1
a
b
Figure 1.13
(a) Gneiss in which bands of quartz and feldspar are more or less separated from biotite and hornblende. Qu, quartz; F, feldspar;
B, biotite; H, hornblende. (b) Banded and folded gneiss exposed north of Dombas, Norway.
19
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
and so schistosity tends to disappear in rocks of high-grade metamorphism. By contrast, foliation
becomes a more significant feature. What is more, minerals of flaky habit are replaced in the
higher grades of metamorphism by minerals such as garnet [Fe Al (SiO ) ], kyanite (Al SiO ),
3 2 43 2 5
sillimanite (Al SiO ), diopside [Ca,Mg(Si O )] and orthoclase.
2 5 2 6
Thermal or Contact Metamorphism
Thermal metamorphism occurs around igneous intrusions so that the principal factor control-
ling these reactions is temperature. The rate at which chemical reactions take place during
thermal metamorphism is exceedingly slow and depends on the rock types and temperatures
involved. Equilibrium in metamorphic rocks, however, is attained more readily at higher
grades because reaction proceeds more rapidly.
The encircling zone of metamorphic rocks around an intrusion is referred to as the contact aure-
ole (Fig. 1.14). The size of an aureole depends on the size and temperature of the intrusion
when emplaced, the quantity of hot gases and hydrothermal solutions that emanated from it,
Figure 1.14
Asketch map of Skiddaw Granite and its contact aureole, Cumbria, England.
20
Chapter 1
and the types of country rocks involved. Aureoles developed in argillaceous (or pelitic)
sediments are more impressive than those found in arenaceous or calcareous rocks. This is
because clay minerals, which account for a large proportion of the composition of argilla-
ceous rocks, are more susceptible to temperature changes than quartz or calcite. Aureoles
formed in igneous or previously metamorphosed terrains also are less significant than those
developed in argillaceous sediments. Nevertheless, the capricious nature of thermal meta-
morphism must be emphasized, because the width of the aureole may vary even within one
formation of the same rock type.
Within a contact aureole, there is usually a sequence of mineralogical changes from the
country rocks to the intrusion, which have been brought about by the effects of a decreasing
thermal gradient whose source was in the hot magma. Indeed, aureoles in argillaceous rocks
may be concentrically zoned with respect to the intrusion. A frequently developed sequence
varies inward from spotted slates to schists and then to hornfelses. Such an aureole is normally
characterized mineralogically by chlorite [(Ca,Fe,Mg)Al (Al Si )O (OH) ] and muscovitein the
2 2 2 10 2
outer zone, biotite with or without andalusite (Al SiO ) in the next zone, and biotite, cordierite
2 5
[(Mg,Fe)Al (AlSi )O ] and sillimanite (AlSiO ) in the zone nearest the contact.
2 3 5 18 2 5
Hornfelses are characteristic products of high-grade thermal metamorphism. They are dark-
coloured rocks with a fine-grained decussate, that is, interlocking texture, containing
andalusite, cordierite, quartz, biotite, muscovite, microcline (KAlSi O ) or orthoclase, and sodic
3 8
plagioclase.
Aureoles formed in calcareous rocks frequently exhibit greater mineralogical variation and
less regularity than do those in argillaceous rocks. Zoning, except on a small and localized
scale, commonly is obscure. The width of the aureole and the mineral assemblage developed
in the aureole appear to be related to the chemical composition and permeability of the parent
calcareous beds. Marbles may be found in these aureoles, forming when limestone under-
goes metamorphism.
The reactions that occur when arenaceous sediments are subjected to thermal metamor-
phism are usually less complicated than those that take place in their argillaceous or cal-
careous counterparts. For example, the metamorphism of a quartz arenite leads to
the recrystallization of quartz to form quartzite with a mosaic texture; the higher the grade,
the coarser the fabric. It is the impurities in sandstone that give rise to new minerals
upon metamorphism. At high grades, foliation tends to develop and a gneissose rock is
produced.
The acid and intermediate igneous rocks are resistant to thermal metamorphism; indeed,
they are usually only affected at very high grades. For example, when granites are intruded
21
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
by basic igneous masses, total recrystallization may be brought about in the immediate
neighbourhood of the contact to produce a gneissose rock.
Basic igneous rocks undergo a number of changes when subjected to thermal metamorphism.
They consist essentially of pyroxenes and plagioclase, and the first changes take place in the
ferromagnesian minerals, that is, in the outermost region of an aureole the plagioclases are
unaffected, thereby leaving the parental igneous texture intact. As the intrusion is
approached, the rocks become completely recrystallized. At medium grade metamorphism,
hornblende hornfelses are common. Nearest the contact, the high-grade rocks are typically
represented by pyroxene hornfelses.
Regional Metamorphism
Metamorphic rocks extending over hundreds or even thousands of square kilometres are
found exposed in the Pre-Cambrian shields, such as those that occur in Labrador and
Fennoscandia, and in the eroded roots of fold mountains. As a consequence, the term
regional has been applied to this type of metamorphism. Regional metamorphism involves
both the processes of changing temperature and stress. The principal factor is temperature,
which attains a maximum of around 800∞C in regional metamorphism. Igneous intrusions are
found within areas of regional metamorphism, but their influence is restricted. Regional meta-
morphism may be regarded as taking place when the confining pressures are in excess of
3 kilobars. What is more, temperatures and pressures conducive to regional metamorphism
must have been maintained over millions of years. That temperatures rose and fell is indi-
cated by the evidence of repeated cycles of metamorphism. These are not only demonstrated
by mineralogical evidence but also by that of structures. For example, cleavage and schis-
tosity are the results of deformation that is approximately synchronous with metamorphism
but many rocks show evidence of more than one cleavage or schistosity that implies repeated
deformation and metamorphism.
Regional metamorphism is a progressive process, that is, in any given terrain formed initially
of rocks of similar composition, zones of increasing grade may be defined by different min-
eral assemblages. Each zone is defined by a significant mineral, and their mineralogical vari-
ation can be correlated with changing temperature–pressure conditions. The boundaries of
each zone can therefore be regarded as isograds, that is, boundaries of equal metamorphic
conditions.
Slates are the products of low-grade regional metamorphism of argillaceous or pelitic
sediments. As the metamorphic grade increases, slates give way to phyllites in which some-
what larger crystals of chlorite and mica occur. Phyllites, in turn, give way to mica schists.
22
Chapter 1
A variety of minerals such as garnet [Fe Al (SiO ) ], kyanite (Al SiO ) and staurolite
3 2 43 2 5
[FeAl Si O (OH) ] may be present in these schists, indicating formation at increasing
4 2 10 2
temperatures.
When sandstones are subjected to regional metamorphism, a quartzite develops that has a
granoblastic (i.e. granular) texture. A micaceous sandstone or one in which there is an appre-
ciable amount of argillaceous material, on metamorphism yields a quartz–mica schist.
Metamorphism of arkoses and feldspathic sandstones leads to the recrystallization of
feldspar and quartz so that granulites with a granoblastic texture are produced.
Relatively pure carbonate rocks when subjected to regional metamorphism simply recrystal-
lize to form either calcite or dolomite marble with a granoblastic texture. Any silica present
in a limestone tends to reform as quartz. The presence of micas in these rocks tends to give
them a schistose appearance, schistose marbles or calc-schists being developed. Where
mica is abundant, it forms lenses or continuous layers, giving the rock a foliated structure.
In regionally metamorphosed rocks derived from acid igneous parents, quartz and white mica
are important components, muscovite–quartz schist being a typical product of the lower
grades. In contrast, white mica is converted to potash feldspar at high grades. In the medium
and high grades, quartzo–feldspathic gneisses and granulites are common. Some of the
gneisses are strongly foliated.
Basic rocks are converted into greenschists by low-grade regional metamorphism, to
amphibolites at medium grade, and to pyroxene granulites and eclogites at high grades.
Dynamic Metamorphism
Dynamic metamorphism is produced on a comparatively small scale and is usually highly
localized; for example, its effects may be found in association with large faults or thrusts.
On a larger scale, it is associated with folding, however, in the latter case, it may be difficult to dis-
tinguish between the processes and effects of dynamic metamorphism and those of low-grade
regional metamorphism. What can be said is that at low temperatures, recrystallization is at a
minimum and the texture of a rock is governed largely by the mechanical processes that have
been operative. The processes of dynamic metamorphism include brecciation, cataclasis,
granulation, mylonitization, pressure solution, partial melting and slight recrystallization.
Stress is the most important factor in dynamic metamorphism. When a body is subjected to
stresses that exceed its limit of elasticity, it is permanently strained or deformed. If the stresses
are equal in all directions, then the body simply undergoes a change in volume, whereas if
they are directional, its shape is changed.
23
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Brecciation is the process by which a rock is fractured, the angular fragments produced being
of varying size. It is commonly associated with faulting and thrusting. The fragments of a
crush breccia may themselves be fractured, and the mineral components may exhibit perma-
nent strain phenomena. If pieces are rotated during the process of fragmentation, they are
eventually rounded and embedded in the worn-down powdered material. The resultant rock
is referred to as a crush conglomerate.
Mylonites are produced by the pulverization of rocks, which not only involves extreme shear-
ing stress but also considerable confining pressure. Mylonitization is therefore associated
with major faults. Mylonites are composed of strained porphyroblasts (metamorphic equiva-
lent of phenocrysts) set in an abundant matrix of fine-grained or cryptocrystalline material.
Quartzes in the groundmass are frequently elongated. Those mylonites that have suffered
great stress lack porphyroblasts, having a laminated structure with a fine granular texture.
The individual laminae are generally distinguishable because of their different colour.
Protomylonite is transitional between micro-crush breccia and mylonite, while ultramylonite is
a banded or structureless rock in which the material has been reduced to powder size.
In the most extreme cases of dynamic metamorphism, the resultant crushed material may be
fused to produce a vitrified rock referred to as a pseudotachylite. It usually occurs as very
small discontinuous lenticular bodies or branching veins in quartzite, amphibolite and gneiss.
Quartz and feldspar fragments are usually found in a dark-coloured glassy base.
Metasomatism
Metasomatic activity involves the introduction of material into, as well as removal from, a rock
mass by a hot gaseous or an aqueous medium, the resultant chemical reactions leading to
mineral replacement. Thus, two types of metasomatism can be distinguished, namely, pneuma-
tolytic (brought about by hot gases) and hydrothermal (brought about by hot solutions).
Replacement occurs as a result of atomic or molecular substitution, so that there usually is
little change in rock texture. The composition of the transporting medium is changing contin-
uously because of material being dissolved out of and emplaced into the rocks that are
affected.
The gases and hot solutions involved emanate from an igneous source, and the effects of
metasomatism are often particularly notable about an intrusion of granitic character. Indeed,
there is a greater concentration of volatiles in acid than in basic magmas.
Both gases and solutions make use of any structural weaknesses, such as faults, fissures
or joint planes, in the rocks they invade. Because these provide easier paths for escape,
24
Chapter 1
metasomatic activity is concentrated along them. They also travel through the pore spaces in
rocks, the rate of infiltration being affected by the porosity, the shape of the pores and the
temperature–pressure gradients. Metasomatic action, especially when it is concentrated
along fissure zones and veins, may bring about severe alteration of certain minerals. For
instance, feldspars in granite or gneiss may be highly kaolinized as a result of metasomatism,
and limestone may be reduced to a weakly bonded granular aggregate.
Sedimentary Rocks
The sedimentary rocks form an outer skin on the Earth’s crust, covering three-quarters of the
continental areas and most of the sea floor. They vary in thickness up to 10 km. Nevertheless,
they only comprise about 5% of the crust.
Most sedimentary rocks are of secondary origin, in that they consist of detrital material
derived by the breakdown of pre-existing rocks. Indeed, it has been variously estimated that
shales and sandstones, both of mechanical derivation, account for between 75 and 95% of
all sedimentary rocks. However, certain sedimentary rocks are the products of chemical or
biochemical precipitation whereas others are of organic origin. Thus, the sedimentary rocks
can be divided into two principal groups, namely, the clastic (detrital) or exogenetic, and the
non-clastic or endogenetic types. Nevertheless, one factor that all sedimentary rocks have in
common is that they are deposited, and this gives rise to their most noteworthy characteristic,
that is, they are bedded or stratified.
As noted above, most sedimentary rocks are formed from the breakdown products of
pre-existing rocks. Accordingly, the rate at which denudation takes place acts as a control on
the rate of sedimentation, which in turn affects the character of a sediment. However, the rate
of denudation is not only determined by the agents at work, that is, by weathering, or by river,
marine, wind or ice action, but also by the nature of the surface. In other words, upland areas
are more rapidly worn away than are lowlands. Indeed, denudation may be regarded as a
cyclic process, in that it begins with or is furthered by the elevation of a land surface, and
as this is gradually worn down, the rate of denudation slackens. Each cycle of erosion is
accompanied by a cycle of sedimentation.
The particles of which most sedimentary rocks are composed have undergone varying
amounts of transportation. The amount of transport together with the agent responsible, be it
water, wind or ice, play an important role in determining the character of a sediment. For
instance, transport over short distances usually means that the sediment is unsorted (the
exception being beach sands), as does transportation by ice. With lengthier transport by
water or wind, not only does the material become better sorted but it is further reduced in size.
25
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The character of a sedimentary rock is also influenced by the type of environment in which it
has been deposited, the presence of which is witnessed as ripple marks and cross bedding
in sands that accumulate in shallow water.
The composition of a sedimentary rock depends partly on the composition of the parent material
and the stability of its component minerals, and partly on the type of action to which the parent
rock was subjected and the length of time it had to suffer such action. The least stable minerals
tend to be those that are developed in environments very different from those experienced at the
Earth’s surface. In fact, quartz, and, to a much lesser extent, mica, are the only common detrital
constituents of igneous and metamorphic rocks that are found in abundance in sediments. Most
of the other minerals are ultimately broken down chemically to give rise to clay minerals. The
more mature a sedimentary rock is, the more it approaches a stable end product, and very
mature sediments are likely to have experienced more than one cycle of sedimentation.
The type of climatic regime in which a deposit accumulates and the rate at which this takes
place also affect the stability and maturity of the resultant sedimentary product. For example,
chemical decay is inhibited in arid regions so that less stable minerals are more likely to sur-
vive than in humid regions. However, even in humid regions, immature sediments may form
when basins are rapidly filled with detritus derived from neighbouring mountains, the rapid
burial affording protection against the attack of subaerial agents.
In order to turn unconsolidated sediment into solid rock, it must be lithified. Lithification
involves two processes, consolidation and cementation. The amount of consolidation that
takes place within a sediment depends, first, on its composition and texture and, second, on
the pressures acting on it, notably that due to the weight of overburden. Consolidation of sed-
iments deposited in water also involves dewatering, that is, the expulsion of connate water
from the sediments. The porosity of a sediment is reduced as consolidation takes place, and,
as the individual particles become more closely packed, they may even be deformed.
Pressures developed during consolidation may lead to the differential solution of minerals
and the authigenic growth of new ones.
Fine-grained sediments possess a higher porosity than do coarser types and, therefore,
undergo a greater amount of consolidation. For instance, muds and clays may have original
porosities ranging up to 80%, compared to 45 to 50% in sands and silts. Hence, if muds and
clays could be completely consolidated (they never are), they would occupy only 20 to 45% of
their original volume. The amount of consolidation that takes place in sands and silts varies from
15 to 25%.
Cementation involves the bonding together of sedimentary particles by the precipitation of
material in the pore spaces. This reduces the porosity. The cementing material may be
26
Chapter 1
derived by partial intrastratal solution of grains or may be introduced into the pore spaces
from an extraneous source by circulating waters. Conversely, cement may be removed from
a sedimentary rock by leaching. The type of cement and, more importantly, the amount, affect
the strength of a sedimentary rock. The type also influences its colour. For example, sand-
stones with siliceous or calcium carbonate cement are usually whitish grey, those with sideritic
(iron carbonate) cement are buff coloured, whereas a red colour is indicative of hematitic (iron
oxide) cement and brown of limonite (hydrated iron oxide). However, sedimentary rocks are
frequently cemented by more than one material.
The matrix of a sedimentary rock refers to the fine material trapped within the pore spaces
between the particles. It helps to bind the latter together.
The texture of a sedimentary rock refers to the size, shape and arrangement of its constituent
particles. Size is a property that is not easy to assess accurately, for the grains and pebbles
of which clastic sediments are composed are irregular, three-dimensional objects. Direct
measurement can only be applied to large individual fragments where the length of the three
principal axes can be recorded. But even this rarely affords a true picture of size. Estimation
of volume by displacement may provide a better measure. Because of their smallness, the
size of grains of sands and silts has to be measured indirectly by sieving and sedimentation
techniques, respectively. If individual particles of clay have to be measured, this can be done
with the aid of an electron microscope. If a rock is strongly indurated, its disaggregation
is impossible without fracturing many of the grains. In such a case, a thin section of the rock
is made and size analysis is carried out with the aid of a petrological microscope, mechanical
stage and micrometer.
The results of a size analysis may be represented graphically by a frequency curve or
histogram. More frequently, however, they are used to draw a cumulative curve. The latter
may be drawn on semi-logarithmic paper (Fig. 1.15).
Various statistical parameters such as median and mean size, deviation, skewness and kur-
tosis can be calculated from data derived from cumulative curves. The median or mean size
permits the determination of the grade of gravel, sand or silt, or their lithified equivalents.
Deviation affords a measure of sorting. However, the latter can be quickly and simply esti-
mated by visual examination of the curve in that the steeper it is, the more uniform the sorting
of the sediment.
The size of the particles of a clastic sedimentary rock allows it to be placed in one of three
groups that are termed rudaceous or psephitic, arenaceous or psammitic and argillaceous or
pelitic. Reference to size scales is made in Chapter 5, where a description of mixed aggregates
also is provided.
27
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.15
Grading curves.
Shape is probably the most fundamental property of any particle, but, unfortunately it is one of
the most difficult to quantify. Shape is frequently assessed in terms of roundness and spheric-
ity, which may be estimated visually by comparison with standard images (Fig. 1.16). However,
because the latter is a subjective assessment, the values obtained suffer accordingly.
A sedimentary rock is an aggregate of particles, and some of its characteristics depend on
the position of these particles in space. The degree of grain orientation within a rock varies
between perfect preferred orientation, in which all the long axes run in the same direction,
and perfect random orientation, where the long axes point in all directions. The latter is found
only infrequently as most aggregates possess some degree of grain orientation.
The arrangement of particles in a sedimentary rock involves the concept of packing, which
refers to the spatial density of the particles in an aggregate. Packing has been defined as the
mutual spatial relationship among the grains. It includes grain-to-grain contacts and the
shape of the contact. The latter involves the closeness or spread of particles, that is, how
much space in a given area is occupied by grains. Packing is an important property of sedi-
mentary rocks, for it is related to their degree of consolidation, density, porosity and strength.
Bedding and Sedimentary Structures
Sedimentary rocks are characterized by their stratification, and bedding planes are frequently
the dominant discontinuity in sedimentary rock masses (Fig. 1.17). As such, their spacing and
28
Chapter 1
character (are they irregular, waved or straight, tight or
open, rough or smooth?) are of particular importance to
the engineer. Several spacing classifications have been
advanced (see Chapter 2).
An individual bed may be regarded as a thickness of
sediment of the same composition that was deposited
under the same conditions. Lamination, on the other
hand, refers to a bed of sedimentary rock that exhibits
thin layers or laminae, usually a few millimetres in thick-
ness. The laminae may be the result of minor fluctua-
tions in the velocity of the transporting medium or the
supply of material, both of which produce alternating
thin layers of slightly different grain size. Generally,
Figure 1.16
however, lamination is associated with the presence of
Images for estimating shape. thin layers of platy minerals, notably micas. These have
a marked preferred orientation, usually parallel to the
bedding planes, and are responsible for the fissility of
the rock. The surfaces of these laminae are usually
smooth and straight. Although lamination is most char-
acteristic of shales, it also may be present in siltstones
and sandstones, and occasionally in some limestones.
Cross or current bedding is a depositional feature that
occurs in sediments of fluvial, littoral, marine and aeo-
lian origin, and is found most notably in sandstones
(Fig. 1.18). In wind-blown sediments, it generally is
referred to as dune bedding. Cross bedding is confined
within an individual sedimentation unit and consists of
cross laminae inclined to the true bedding planes. The
original dip of these cross laminae is frequently between
20 and 30∞. The size of the sedimentation unit in which
they occur varies enormously. For example, in micro-
cross-bedding, it measures only a few millimetres,
whereas in dune bedding, the unit may exceed 100 m.
Although graded bedding occurs in several different types
of sedimentary rock, it is characteristic of greywacke.
As the name suggests, the sedimentation unit exhibits a
grading from coarser grain size at the bottom to finer at
29
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.17
Bedding in sandstone, northwest of Nelson, South Island, New Zealand.
Figure 1.18
Diagram illustrating cross bedding.
30
Chapter 1
the top. Individual graded beds range in thickness from a few millimetres to several metres.
Usually, the thicker the bed, the coarser it is overall.
Sedimentary Rock Types
Gravel is an unconsolidated accumulation of rounded fragments, the lower size limit of which
is 2 mm. The term rubble has been used to describe those deposits that contain angular frag-
ments. The composition of a gravel deposit reflects not only the source rocks of the area from
which it was derived but also is influenced by the agents responsible for its formation and the
climatic regime in which it was (or is being) deposited. The latter two factors have a varying
tendency to reduce the proportion of unstable material present. Relief also influences the
nature of a gravel deposit. For example, gravel production under low relief is small, and the
pebbles tend to be inert residues such as vein quartz, quartzite, chert and flint. Conversely,
high relief and the accompanying rapid erosion yield coarse, immature gravels.
When gravel and larger-size material become indurated, they form conglomerate; when
rubble is indurated, it is termed a breccia (Fig. 1.19). Those conglomerates in which the frag-
ments are in contact and so make up a framework are referred to as orthoconglomerates.
By contrast, those deposits in which the larger fragments are separated by matrix are referred
to as paraconglomerates.
Sands consist of a loose mixture of mineral grains and rock fragments. Generally, they tend
to be dominated by a few minerals, the chief of which is frequently quartz. Usually, the grains
show some degree of orientation, presumably related to the direction of movement of the
transporting medium.
The process by which sand is turned into sandstone is partly mechanical, involving grain
fracturing, bending and deformation. However, chemical activity is much more important.
The latter includes decomposition and solution of grains, precipitation of material from
pore fluids and intergranular reactions. Silica (SiO ) is the commonest cementing agent
2
in sandstones, particularly older sandstones. Various carbonate cements, especially
calcite (CaCO ), are also common cementing materials. Ferruginous and gypsiferous
3
cements also are found in sandstones. Cement, notably the carbonate types, may be
removed in solution by percolating pore fluids. This brings about varying degrees of
decementation.
Quartz, feldspar and rock fragments are the principal detrital components of which sand-
stones are composed, and consequently they have been used to define the major classes
of sandstone. Pettijohn et al. (1972) also used the type of matrix in their classification.
31
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.19
Aconglomerate in the Old Red Sandstone, north of Belfast, Northern Ireland.
In other words, those sandstones with more than 15% matrix were termed wackes. The chief
type of wacke is greywacke, which can be subdivided into lithic and feldspathic varieties.
Those sandstones with less than 15% matrix were divided into three families. The ortho-
quartzites or quartz arenites contain 95% or more of quartz; 25% or more of the detrital
material in arkoses consists of feldspar; and in lithic sandstones, 25% or more of the detrital
material consists of rock fragments (Fig. 1.20).
Silts are clastic sediments derived from pre-existing rocks, chiefly by mechanical breakdown
processes. They are composed mainly of fine quartz material. Silts may occur in residual
soils, but they are not important in such instances. However, silts are commonly found in allu-
vial, lacustrine, fluvio-glacial and marine deposits. These silts tend to interdigitate with
deposits of sand and clay. Silts are also present with sands and clays in estuarine and deltaic
sediments. Lacustrine silts are often banded. Marine silts may also be banded. Wind-blown
silts are generally uniformly sorted.
Siltstones may be massive or laminated, the individual laminae being picked out by mica
and/or carbonaceous material. Micro-cross-bedding is frequently developed and the laminations
may be convoluted in some siltstones. Siltstones have high quartz content with predominantly
32
Chapter 1
Figure 1.20
Thin section of Fell Sandstone (a quartz arenite), Lower Carboniferous, Northumberland, England.
siliceous cement. Frequently, siltstones are interbedded with shales or fine-grained sand-
stones, the siltstones occurring as thin ribs.
Loess is a wind-blown deposit that is mainly of silt size and consists mostly of quartz parti-
cles, with lesser amounts of feldspar and clay minerals. It is characterized by a lack of strat-
ification and uniform sorting, and occurs as blanket deposits in western Europe, the United
States, Russia and China (Fig. 1.21). Deposits of loess are of Pleistocene age and, because
they show a close resemblance to fine-grained glacial debris, their origin has customarily
been assigned a glacial association. For instance, in the case of those regions mentioned,
it is presumed that winds blowing from the arid interiors of the northern continents during
glacial times picked up fine glacial outwash material and carried it for hundreds or thou-
sands of kilometres before deposition took place. Deposition is assumed to have occurred
over steppe lands, and the grasses left behind fossil root holes, which typify loess. These
account for its crude columnar structure. The lengthy transport explains the uniform sorting
of loess.
Deposits of clay are composed principally of fine quartz and clay minerals. The latter repre-
sent the commonest breakdown products of most of the chief rock-forming silicate minerals.
33
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 1.21
Adeposit of loess near Kansas City, United States.
The clay minerals are all hydrated aluminium silicates and possess a flaky habit, that is, they
are phyllosilicates. The three major families of clay minerals are the kandites (kaolinite), illites
(illite) and smectites (montmorillonite).
Kaolinite [Al Si O (OH) ] is formed by the alteration of feldspars, feldspathoids and other alu-
4 4 10 8
minium silicates due to hydrothermal action. Weathering under acidic conditions is also
responsible for kaolinization. Kaolinite is the chief clay mineral in most residual and trans-
ported clays, is important in shales, and is found in variable amounts in fireclays, laterites and
soils. It is the most important clay mineral in china clays and ball clays. Deposits of china clay
(kaolin) are associated with acid igneous rocks such as granites, granodiorites and tonalites,
and with gneisses and granulites.
Illite [K Al (Al ,Si )O (OH) ] is of common occurrence in clays and shales, and is found
2-3 8 2-3 13-14 40 8
in variable amounts in tills and loess, but is less common in soils. It develops as an alteration
product of feldspars, micas or ferromagnesian silicates upon weathering or may form from
other clay minerals during diagenesis. Like kaolinite, illite also may be of hydrothermal origin.
The development of illite, both under weathering and by hydrothermal processes, is favoured
by an alkaline environment.
34
Chapter 1
Montmorillonite [(Mg,Al) (Al,Si) O (OH) .nH O] develops when basic igneous rocks in badly
4 8 20 4 2
drained areas are subjected to weathering. The presence of magnesium is necessary for this
mineral to form, if the rocks were well drained, then the magnesium would be carried away
and kaolinite would develop. An alkaline environment favours the formation of montmoril-
lonite. Montmorillonite occurs in soils and argillaceous sediments such as shales derived
from basic igneous rocks. It is the principal constituent of bentonitic clays, which are formed
by the weathering of basic volcanic ash, and of fuller’s earth, which is also formed when basic
igneous rocks are weathered. In addition, when basic igneous rocks are subjected to
hydrothermal action, this may lead to the development of montmorillonite.
Residual clay deposits develop in place and are the products of weathering. In humid regions,
residual clays tend to become enriched in hydroxides of ferric iron and aluminium, and impov-
erished in lime, magnesia and alkalies. Even silica is removed in hot humid regions, resulting
in the formation of hydrated alumina or iron oxide, as in laterite.
The composition of transported clays varies because these materials consist mainly of abrasion
products (usually silty particles) and transported residual clay material.
Shale is the commonest sedimentary rock and is characterized by its lamination.
Sedimentary rock of similar size range and composition, but which is not laminated, is
referred to as mudstone. In fact, there is no sharp distinction between shale and mudstone,
one grading into the other. An increasing content of siliceous or calcareous material
decreases the fissility of shale, whereas shales that have a high organic content are finely
laminated. Laminae range from 0.05 to 1.0 mm in thickness, with most in the range of 0.1 to
0.4 mm. Clay minerals and quartz are the principal constituents of mudstones and shales.
Feldspars often occur in the siltier shales. Shale may also contain appreciable quantities of
carbonate, particularly calcite, and gypsum (CaSO .2H O). Indeed, calcareous shale fre-
4 2
quently grades into shaly limestone. Carbonaceous black shales are rich in organic matter,
contain a varying amount of pyrite (FeS ), and are finely laminated.
2
The term limestone is applied to those rocks in which the carbonate fraction exceeds 50%,
over half of which is calcite or aragonite (CaCO ). If the carbonate material is made up chiefly
3
of dolomite (CaCO .MgCO ), the rock is named dolostone (this rock generally is referred to
3 3
as dolomite, but this term can be confused with that of the mineral of the same name).
Limestones and dolostones constitute about 20 to 25% of the sedimentary rocks, according
to Pettijohn (1975). This figure is much higher than some of the estimates provided by previ-
ous authors. Limestones are polygenetic. Some are of mechanical origin, representing car-
bonate detritus that has been transported and deposited. Others represent chemical or
biochemical precipitates that have formed in place. Allochthonous or transported limestone
has a fabric similar to that of sandstone and also may display current structures such as cross
35
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
bedding and ripple marks. By contrast, carbonate rocks that have formed in situ, that is,
autochthonous types, show no evidence of sorting or current action and at best possess a
poorly developed stratification. Exceptionally, some autochthonous limestones show growth
bedding, the most striking of which is stromatolitic bedding, as seen in algal limestones.
Lithification of carbonate sediments often is initiated as cementation at points of intergranu-
lar contact rather than as consolidation. In fact, carbonate muds consolidate very little
because of this early cementation. The rigidity of the weakest carbonate rocks, such as chalk,
may be attributed to the mechanical interlocking of grains with little or no cement. Although
cementation may take place more or less at the same time as deposition, cemented and
uncemented assemblages may be found within short horizontal distances. Indeed, a recently
cemented carbonate layer may overlie uncemented material. Because cementation occurs
concurrently with or soon after deposition, carbonate sediments can support high overburden
pressures before consolidation takes place. Hence, high values of porosity may be retained
to considerable depths of burial. Eventually, however, the porosity is reduced by post-
depositional changes that bring about recrystallization. Thus, a crystalline limestone is
formed in this manner.
Folk (1973) distinguished two types of dolostone. First, he recognized an extremely fine-
grained crystalline dolomicrite (less than 20 microns grain diameter), and secondly, a more
coarsely grained dolostone in which there was plentiful evidence of replacement.
He regarded the first type as of primary origin and the second as being formed as a result of
diagenetic replacement of calcite by dolomite in limestone. Primary dolostones tend to be
thinly laminated and generally are unfossiliferous. They are commonly associated with evap-
orates and may contain either nodules or scattered crystals of gypsum or anhydrite (CaSO ).
4
In those dolostones formed by dolomitization, the original textures and structures may be
obscured or may even have disappeared.
Evaporitic deposits are quantitatively unimportant as sediments. They are formed by precip-
itation from saline waters, the high salt content being brought about by evaporation from
inland seas or lakes in arid areas. Salts can also be deposited from subsurface brines,
brought to the surface of a playa or sabkha flat by capillary action (Fig. 1.22). Seawater con-
tains approximately 3.5%, by weight, of dissolved salts, about 80% of which is sodium chlo-
ride. Experimental work has shown that when the original volume of seawater is reduced by
evaporation to about half, a little iron oxide and some calcium carbonate are precipitated.
Gypsum begins to form when the volume is reduced to about one-fifth of the original, rock
salt begins to precipitate when about one-tenth of the volume remains, and, finally, when only
1.5% of the seawater is left, potash and magnesium salts start to crystallize. This order
agrees in a general way with the sequences found in some evaporitic deposits, however,
many exceptions are known. Many complex replacement sequences occur among evaporitic
36
Chapter 1
Figure 1.22
Salt teepees on the Devil’s Golf Course, a salina, Death Valley, California.
rocks, for example, carbonate rocks may be replaced by anhydrite and sulphate rocks by
halite (NaCl).
Organic residues that accumulate as sediments are of two major types, namely, peaty mate-
rial that when buried gives rise to coal, and sapropelic residues. Sapropel is silt rich in, or
composed wholly of, organic compounds that collect at the bottom of still bodies of water.
Such deposits may give rise to cannel or boghead coals. Sapropelic coals usually contain a
significant amount of inorganic matter as opposed to humic coals in which the inorganic con-
tent is low. The former are generally not extensive and are not underlain by seat earths
(i.e. fossil soils). Peat deposits accumulate in poorly drained environments in which the
formation of humic acid gives rise to deoxygenated conditions. These inhibit the bacterial
decay of organic matter. Peat accumulates wherever the deposition of plant debris exceeds
the rate of its decomposition. A massive deposit of peat is required to produce a thick seam
of coal; for example, a seam 1 m thick probably represents 15 m of peat.
37
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Chert and flint are the two most common siliceous sediments of chemical origin. Chert is a
dense rock composed of one or more forms of silica such as opal, chalcedony or microcrys-
talline quartz. Sponge spicules and radiolarian remains may be found in some cherts, and
carbonate material may be scattered throughout impure varieties. Gradations occur from
chert to sandstone with chert cement, although sandy cherts are not common. Chert may
suffer varying degrees of devitrification. Chert may occur as thin beds or as nodules in car-
bonate host rocks. Both types are of polygenetic origin. In other words, chert may be a
replacement product, as in siliceous limestone, for example, or it may represent a biochemi-
cal accumulate formed in a basin below the calcium carbonate compensation depth. In yet
other cases, chert may be the product of an ephemeral silica-rich alkaline lake environment.
Some sediments may have a high content of iron. The iron carbonate, siderite (FeCO ), often
3
occurs interbedded with chert or mixed in varying proportions with clay, as in clay ironstones.
Some iron-bearing formations are formed mainly of iron oxide, hematite (Fe O ) being the most
2 3
common mineral. Hematite-rich beds are generally oolitic. Limonite (2Fe O .3H O) occurs in
2 3 2
oolitic form in some ironstones. Bog iron ore is chiefly an earthy mixture of ferric hydroxides.
Siliceous iron ores include chamositic ironstones (chamosite, Fe Al Si2O .3H O), which are
3 2 10 2
also typically oolitic. Glauconitic [glauconite, K(Fe3Al) (Si,Al) O (OH) ] sandstones and lime-
2 4 10 2
stones may contain 20% or more FeO and FeO . On rare occasions, bedded pyrite has been
2 3
found in black shale.
Stratigraphy and Stratification
Stratigraphy is the branch of geology that deals with the study and interpretation of stratified
rocks, and with the identification, description, sequence, both vertical and horizontal, map-
ping and correlation of stratigraphic rock units. As such, it begins with the discrimination and
description of stratigraphical units such as formations. This is necessary so that the complexities
present in every stratigraphical section may be simplified and organized.
Deposition involves the build-up of material on a given surface, either as a consequence of
chemical or biological growth or, far more commonly, due to mechanically broken particles
being laid down on such a surface. The changes that occur during deposition are responsi-
ble for stratification, that is, the layering that characterizes sedimentary rocks. A simple inter-
ruption of deposition ordinarily does not produce stratification. The most obvious change that
gives rise to stratification is in the composition of the material being deposited. Even minor
changes in the type of material may lead to distinct stratification, especially if they affect the
colour of the rocks concerned. Changes in grain size may also cause notable layering, and
changes in other textural characteristics may help distinguish one bed from another, as may
variations in the degree of consolidation or cementation.
38
Chapter 1
The extent and regularity of beds of sedimentary rocks vary within wide limits. This is because
lateral persistence and regularity of stratification reflect the persistence and regularity of the
agent responsible for deposition. For instance, sands may have been deposited in one area
whereas muds were being deposited in a neighbouring area. What is more, a formation with a
particular lithology, which is mappable as a stratigraphic unit, may not have been laid down at
the same time wherever it occurs. The base of such a formation is described as diachronous
(Fig. 1.23). Diachronism is brought about when a basin of deposition is advancing or retreating
as, for example, in marine transgression or regression. In an expanding basin, the lowest
sediments to accumulate are not as extensive as those succeeding. The latter are said to over-
lap the lowermost deposits. Conversely, if the basin of deposition is shrinking, the opposite
situation arises in that succeeding beds are less extensive. This phenomenon is termed offlap.
Agents confined to channels or responsible for deposition over limited areas produce irregu-
lar strata that are not persistent. By contrast, strata that are very persistent are produced
by agents operating over wide areas. In addition, folding and faulting of strata, along with
subsequent erosion, give rise to discontinuous outcrops.
Since sediments are deposited, it follows that the topmost layer in any succession of strata
is the youngest. Also, any particular stratum in a sequence can be dated by its position in the
sequence relative to other strata. This is the Law of Superposition. This principle applies
to all sedimentary rocks except, of course, those that have been overturned by folding or
where older strata have been thrust over younger rocks. Where strata are overfolded, the
stratigraphical succession is inverted. When fossils are present in the beds concerned, their
Figure 1.23
Diachronism of a lithological boundary and the migration time of a fossil assemblage. The fossiliferous horizon may be regarded
as a time plane if the localities (a), (b) and (c) are not far distant. As a rule, time planes cannot be identified.
39
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
correct way up can be discerned. However, if fossil evidence is lacking, the correct way up
of the succession may be determined from evidence provided by the presence of “way-up”
structures such as graded bedding, cross bedding and ripple marks (Shrock, 1948).
Unconformities
An unconformity represents a break in the stratigraphical record and occurs when changes
in the palaeogeographical conditions lead to a cessation of deposition for a period of time.
Such a break may correspond to a relatively short interval of geological time or a very long
one. An unconformity normally means that uplift and erosion have taken place, resulting in
some previously formed strata being removed. The beds above and below the surface of
unconformity are described as unconformable.
The structural relationship between unconformable units allows four types of unconformity
to be distinguished. In Figure 1.24a, stratified rocks rest upon igneous or metamorphic rocks.
This type of feature has been referred to as a nonconformity (it also has been called
a heterolithic unconformity). An angular unconformity is shown in Figure 1.24b, where an
angular discordance separates the two units of stratified rocks. In an angular unconformity,
Figure 1.24
Types of unconformities: (a) nonconformity or heterolithic unconformity, (b) angular unconformity, (c) disconformity and
(d) paraconformity.
40
Chapter 1
the lowest bed in the upper sequence of strata usually rests on beds of differing ages. This
is referred to as overstep. In a disconformity, as illustrated in Figure 1.24c, the beds lie par-
allel both above and below the unconformable surface, but the contact between the two units
concerned is an uneven surface of erosion. When deposition is interrupted for a significant
period but there is no apparent erosion of sediments or tilting or folding, then subsequently
formed beds are deposited parallel to those already existing. In such a case, the interruption
in sedimentation may be demonstrable only by the incompleteness of the fossil sequence.
This type of unconformity has been termed a paraconformity (Fig. 1.24d).
One of the most satisfactory criteria for the recognition of unconformities is evidence of an
erosion surface between two formations. Such evidence may take the form of pronounced
irregularities in the surface of the unconformity. Evidence also may take the form of weath-
ered strata beneath the unconformity, weathering having occurred prior to the deposition of
the strata above. Fossil soils provide a good example. The abrupt truncation of bedding
planes, folds, faults, dykes, joints, etc., in the beds below the unconformity is characteristic
of an unconformity (Fig. 1.25), although large-scale thrusts will give rise to a similar structural
arrangement. Post-unconformity sediments often commence with a conglomeratic deposit.
The pebbles in the conglomerate may be derived from the older rocks below the unconformity.
Figure 1.25
Angular unconformity between highly folded Horton Flags, Silurian, below and almost horizontal Lower Carboniferous
Limestone above, Helwith Bridge, North Yorkshire, England.
41
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Rock and Time Units
Stratigraphy distinguishes rock units and time units. A rock unit, such as a stratum or a for-
mation, possesses a variety of physical characteristics that enable it to be recognized as
such, and, hence, measured, described, mapped and analysed. A rock unit is sometimes
termed a lithostratigraphical unit.
A particular rock unit required a certain interval of time for it to form. Hence, stratigraphy not only
deals with strata but also with age, and the relationship between strata and age. Accordingly,
time units and time-rock units have been recognized. Time units are simply intervals of time, the
largest of which are eons, although this term tends to be used infrequently. There are two eons,
representing Pre-Cambrian time and Phanerozoic time. Eons are divided into eras, and eras into
periods (Table 1.1). Periods are, in turn, divided into epochs and epochs into ages. Time units
and time-rock units are directly comparable, that is, there is a corresponding time-rock unit for
each time unit. For example, the time-rock unit corresponding to a period is a system. Indeed,
the time allotted to a time unit is determined from the rocks of the corresponding time-rock unit.
A time-rock unit has been defined as a succession of strata bounded by theoretically uniform
time planes, regardless of the local lithology of the unit. Fossil evidence usually provides the
basis for the establishment of time planes. Ideal time-rock units would be bounded by com-
pletely independent time planes, however, practically the establishment of time-rock units
depend on whatever evidence is available.
Geological systems are time-rock units that are based on stratigraphical successions pres-
ent in certain historically important areas. In other words, in their type localities, the major
time-rock units are also rock units. The boundaries of major time-rock units are generally
important structural or faunal breaks or are placed at highly conspicuous changes in lithol-
ogy. Major unconformities are frequently chosen as boundaries. Away from their type areas,
major time-rock units may not be so distinctive or easily separated. In fact, although systems
are regarded as of global application, there are large regions where the recognition of some
of the systems has not proved satisfactory.
Correlation
The process by which the time relationships between strata in different areas are established
is referred to as correlation. Correlation is, therefore, the demonstration of equivalency of
stratigraphical units. Palaeontological and lithological evidence are the two principal criteria
used in correlation. The principle of physical continuity may be of some use in local corre-
lation. In other words, it can be assumed that a given bed, or bedding plane, is roughly
42
43
Chapter
1
Table1.1.The geological timescale
Duration of Total from
Eras Periods and systems Derivation of names period (Ma) beginning (Ma)
Cainozoic Quaternary
Recent or Holocene* Holos =complete whole
Glacial orPleistocene* Pleiston=most 2 or 3 2–3
Tertiary
Pliocene* Pleion =more 9 or 10 12
Miocene* Meion =less (i.e. less
than in Pliocene) 13 25
Oligocene* Oligos =few 15 40
Eocene* Eos =dawn 20 60
Paleocene* Palaios =old 10 70
The preceding comparative terms refer to the proportions of modern
marine shells occuring as fossils.
Mesozoic Cretaceous Creta=chalk 65 135
Jurassic JuraMountains 45 180
Triassic Threefolddivision in Germany 45 225
(New Red Sandstone =desert sandstones of the Triassic period
and part of the Permian)
Palaeozoic Permian Permia, ancient kingdom between the 45 270
Urals and the Volga
Carboniferous Coal (carbon)-bearing 80 350
Devonian Devon (marine sediments)
(Old Red Sandstone =land sediments of the Devonian period) 50 400
Silurian Silures,Celtic tribe of Welsh borders 40 440
Ordovician Ordovices,Celtic tribe of North Wales 60 500
Cambrian Cambria,Roman name for Wales 100 600
Pre-Cambrian Era
Origin of Earth 5000
*Frequently regarded as epochs or stages, “cene” from kainos =recent.
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
contemporaneous throughout an outcrop of bedded rocks. Tracing of bedding planes laterally,
however, may be limited since individual beds or bedding planes die out, are interrupted by
faults, are missing in places due to removal by erosion, are concealed by overburden, or
merge with others laterally. Consequently, outcrops may not be good enough to permit an
individual bed to be traced laterally over an appreciable distance. A more practicable proce-
dure is to trace a member of a formation. However, this also can prove misleading if the beds
are diachronous.
Where outcrops are discontinuous, physical correlation depends on lithological similarity, that
is, on matching rock types across the breaks in hope of identifying the beds involved. The
lithological characters used to make comparison in such situations include gross lithology,
subtle distinctions within one rock type such as a distinctive heavy mineral suite, notable
microscopic features or distinctive key beds. The greater the number of different, and espe-
cially unusual, characters that can be linked, the better is the chance of reliable correlation.
Even so, such factors must be applied with caution and, wherever possible, such correlation
should be verified by the use of fossils.
If correlation can be made from one bed in a particular outcrop to one in another, it can be
assumed that the beds immediately above and below also are correlative, provided, of
course, that there was no significant break in deposition at either exposure. Better still, if two
beds can be correlated between two local exposures, then the intervening beds are presum-
ably correlative, even if the character of the intervening rocks is different in the two outcrops.
This again depends on there being no important break in deposition at either of the locations.
At the end of the eighteenth century, William Smith formulated the Law of Faunal Succession,
which states that strata of different ages are characterized by different fossils or suites of fos-
sils. Smith demonstrated that each formation could be identified by its distinctive suite of fos-
sils without the need of lateral tracing. In this way, he developed the use of guide fossils as a
method of recognizing rocks of equivalent age. The recognition of strata by their fossil content
depends on the fact that species and genera become extinct, with new ones replacing them.
As far as correlation is concerned, good fossils should have a wide geographical distribution
and a limited stratigraphical range. In general, groups of organisms that possessed compli-
cated structures provide better guides for correlation than those that were simple. The use-
fulness of fossils is enhanced if the group concerned evolved rapidly, for where
morphological changes took place rapidly, individual species existed for a relatively short
duration. These fossils provide a more accurate means of subdividing the geological column
and, therefore, provide more precise correlation. Groups that were able to swim or float prove
especially useful since they ranged widely and were little restricted in distribution by the
conditions on the sea floor.
44
Chapter 1
The principal way in which fossils are used in correlation is based on the recognition of
characteristic species in strata of a particular age. This method can be applied in two ways.
First, index fossils can be established, which in turn allows a particular bed to be identified in
terms of geological time. Second, fossils may be used to distinguish zones. A zone may be
defined as that strata that was laid down during a particular interval of time when a given
fauna or flora existed. In some cases, zones have been based on the complete fauna pres-
ent, whereas in other instances they have been based on members of a particular phylum or
class. Nonetheless, a zone is a division of time given in terms of rocks deposited. Although
a faunal or floral zone is defined by reference to an assemblage of fossils, it is usually named
after some characteristic species, and this fossil is known as the zone fossil. Normally, a
faunal or floral zone is identifiable because certain species existed together for some time.
It is assumed that these species have time ranges that are overlapping and that their time
ranges are similar in different areas.
45
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 2
Geological Structures
The two most important features that are produced when strata are deformed by earth
movements are folds and faults, that is, the rocks are buckled or fractured, respectively.
A fold is produced when a more or less planar surface is deformed to give a waved
surface. On the other hand, a fault represents a surface of discontinuity along which the
strata on either side have been displaced relative to each other.
Folds
Anatomy of Folds
There are two important directions associated with inclined strata, namely, dip and strike.
True dip gives the maximum angle at which a bed of rock is inclined and should always be
distinguished from apparent dip (Fig. 2.1). The latter is a dip of lesser magnitude whose direc-
tion can run anywhere between that of true dip and strike. Strike is the trend of inclined strata
and is orientated at right angles to the true dip, it has no inclination (Fig. 2.1).
Folds are wave-like in shape and vary enormously in size. Simple folds are divided into two
types, that is, anticlines and synclines (Fig. 2.2a and b). In the former, the beds are convex
upwards, whereas in the latter, they are concave upwards. The crestal line of an anticline is
the line that joins the highest parts of the fold, whereas the trough line runs through the lowest
parts of a syncline (Fig. 2.2a). The amplitude of a fold is defined as the vertical difference
between the crest and the trough, whereas the length of a fold is the horizontal distance from
crest to crest or trough to trough. The hinge of a fold is the line along which the greatest cur-
vature exists and can be either straight or curved. However, the axial line is another term that
has been used to describe the hinge line. The limb of a fold occurs between the hinges, all
folds having two limbs. The axial plane of a fold is commonly regarded as the plane that
bisects the fold and passes through the hinge line.
The inter-limb angle, which is the angle measured between the two projected planes from the
limbs of the fold, can be used to assess the degree of closure of a fold. Five degrees of
closure can be distinguished based on the inter-limb angle. Gentle folds are those with an
47
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.1
Illustration of dip and strike: orientation of cross-hatched plane can be expressed as strike 330∞, dip 60∞.
inter-limb angle greater than 120∞; in open folds, the inter-limb angle is between 120 and 70∞;
in close folds, it is between 70 and 30∞; tight folds are those with an inter-limb angle of less
than 30∞and, finally, in isoclinal folds, the limbs are parallel and so the inter-limb angle
is zero.
Folds are of limited extent and, when one fades out, the attitude of its axial line changes, that
is, it dips away from the horizontal. This is referred to as the plunge or pitch of the fold (Fig. 2.3).
The amount of plunge can change along the strike of a fold, and a reversal of plunge direction
can occur. The axial line is then waved; concave upwards areas are termed depressions and
convex upwards areas are known as culminations.
Types of Folding
Anticlines and synclines are symmetrical if both limbs are arranged equally about the axial
plane so that the dips on opposing flanks are the same, otherwise they are asymmetrical
(Fig. 2.4a and b). In symmetrical folds, the axis is vertical, whereas it is inclined in asymmet-
rical folds. As folding movements become intensified, overfolds are formed in which both limbs
are inclined, together with the axis, in the same direction but at different angles
(Fig. 2.4a). In a recumbent fold, the beds have been completely overturned so that one limb
is inverted, and the limbs, together with the axial plane, dip at a low angle (Fig. 2.4a).
48
Chapter 2
(b)
Figure 2.2
(a) Block diagram of a non-plunging overturned anticline and syncline, showing various fold elements. (b) Asyncline with an
anticline to the left, Cape Fold Belt, near George, South Africa.
49
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.3
(a) Block diagram of an anticlinal fold illustrating plunge. (b) Eroded plunging anticline. (c) Eroded plunging syncline.
If beds that are horizontal, or nearly so, suddenly dip at a high angle, then the feature they
form is termed a monocline (Fig. 2.4c). When traced along their strike, monoclines may
flatten out eventually or pass into a normal fault; indeed, they often are formed as a result of
faulting at depth. Isoclinal folds are those in which both the limbs and the axial plane are
parallel (Fig. 2.4d). A fan fold is one in which both limbs are folded (Fig. 2.4e).
Relationships of Strata in Folds
Parallel or concentric folds are those where the strata have been bent into more or less par-
allel curves in which the thickness of the individual beds remains the same. From Figure 2.5a,
it can be observed that, because the thickness of the beds remains the same on folding, the
shape of the folds changes with depth and, in fact, they fade out. Parallel folding occurs in
competent (relatively strong) beds that may be interbedded with incompetent (relatively
weak, plastic) strata.
Similar folds are those that retain their shape with depth. This is accomplished by flowage of
material from the limbs into the crest and trough regions (Fig. 2.5b). Similar folds are devel-
oped in incompetent strata. However, true similar folds are rare in nature, for most change
their shape to some degree along the axial plane. Most folds exhibit both the characteristics
of parallel and similar folding.
Most folding is disharmonic in that the shape of the individual folds within the structure is not
uniform, with the fold geometry varying from bed to bed. Disharmonic folding occurs in
interbedded competent and incompetent strata. Its essential feature is that incompetent
horizons display more numerous and smaller folds than the more competent beds enclos-
ing them. It is developed because competent and incompetent beds react differently to
stress.
50
Chapter 2
(b)
Figure 2.4
(a) Types of folds. (b) An asymmetrical anticline with some overturning near the apex, exposed in an open pit, near Lethbridge,
British Columbia. (c) Monoclinal fold. (d) Isoclinal folding. (e) Fan folding.
51
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.5
(a) Parallel folding. (b) Similar folding.
Zigzag or chevron folds have straight or nearly straight limbs with sharply curved or even
pointed hinges (Fig. 2.6). Such folds possess features that are characteristic of both parallel
and similar folds in that the strata in their limbs remain parallel, beds may be thinned but they
never are thickened, and the pattern of the folding persists with depth. Some bedding slip
occurs and gives rise to a small amount of distortion in the hinge regions. The planes about
which the beds are bent sharply are called kink planes, and their attitude governs the geometry
of the fold. Zigzag folds are characteristically found in thin-bedded rocks, especially where
there is a rapid alternation of more rigid beds such as sandstones, with interbedded shales.
Minor Structures Associated with Folding
Cleavage is one of the most notable structures associated with folding and imparts to rocks
the ability to split into thin slabs along parallel or slightly sub-parallel planes of secondary
origin. The distance between cleavage planes varies according to the lithology of the host
rock, that is, the coarser the texture, the further the cleavage planes are apart. Two principal
types of cleavage, namely, flow cleavage, and fracture cleavage, have been recognized.
52
Chapter 2
Figure 2.6
Chevron fold in limestone of Miocene age, Kaikuora, South Island, New Zealand.
Flow cleavage occurs as a result of plastic deformation in which internal readjustments
involving gliding, granulation and the parallel reorientation of minerals of flaky habit such
as micas and chlorite, together with the elongation of quartz and calcite, take place.
The cleavageplanes are commonly only a fraction of a millimetre apart, and when the cleav-
age is well developed, the original bedding planes may have partially or totally disappeared.
Flow cleavagemay develop in deeply buried rocks that are subjected to simple compressive
stress, in which case the cleavage planes are orientated normal to the direction in which the
stress was acting. As a result, the cleavage planes run parallel to the axial planes of the folds.
Many authors equate flow cleavage with true slaty cleavage that is characteristically devel-
oped in slates (see Chapter 1).
Fracture cleavage is a parting defined by closely spaced parallel fractures that are usually
independent of any planar preferred orientation of mineral boundaries that may be present in
a rock mass. It can be regarded as closely spaced jointing, the distance between the planes
being measured in millimetres or even in centimetres (Fig. 2.7). Unlike flow cleavage, there
is no parallel alignment of minerals, fracture cleavage having been caused by shearing
forces. It therefore follows the laws of shearing and develops at an angle of approximately
30∞to the axis of maximum principal stress. However, fracture cleavage often runs almost
normal to the bedding planes and, in such instances, it has been assumed that it is related to
a shear couple. The external stress creates two potential shear fractures but since one of them
53
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.7
Fracture cleavage developed in highly folded Horton Flags, Silurian, near Stainforth, North Yorkshire, England. The inclination
of the fracture cleavage is indicated by the near-vertical hammer. The other hammer indicates the direction of the bedding.
trends almost parallel to the bedding, it is unnecessary for fractures to develop in that direction.
The other direction of potential shearing is the one in which fracture cleavage ultimately
develops, and this is facilitated as soon as the conjugate shear angle exceeds 90∞. Fracture
cleavage is frequently found in folded incompetent strata that lie between competent beds.
For example, where sandstone and shale are highly folded, fracture cleavage occurs in the
shale in order to fill the spaces left between the folds of the sandstone. However, fracture
cleavage need not be confined to the incompetent beds. Where it is developed in competent
rocks, it forms a larger angle with the bedding planes than it does in the incompetent strata.
When brittle rocks are distorted, tension gashes may develop as a result of stretching over the
crest of a fold or they may develop as a result of local extension caused by drag exerted when
beds slip over each other. Those tension gashes that are the result of bending of competent
rocks usually appear as radial fractures concentrated at the crests of anticlines that are sharply
folded. They represent failure following plastic deformation. Tension gashes formed by differ-
ential slip appear on the limbs of folds and are aligned approximately perpendicular to the local
54
Chapter 2
direction of extension. Tension gashes are distinguished from fracture cleavage and other
types of fractures by the fact that their sides tend to gape. As a result, they often contain
lenticular bodies of vein quartz or calcite.
Tectonic shear zones lie parallel to the bedding and appear to be because of displacements
caused by concentric folding. Such shear zones generally occur in clay beds with high clay
mineral contents. The shear zones range up to approximately 0.5 m in thickness and may
extend over hundreds of metres. Each shear zone exhibits a conspicuous principal slip that
forms a gently undulating smooth surface. There are two other main displacement shears.
The interior of a shear zone is dominated by displacement shears and slip surfaces lying en
echelon inclined at 10 to 30∞to the ab plane (a is the direction of movement, b lies in the
plane of shear and cis at right angles to this plane). These give rise to a complex pattern of
shear lenses, the surfaces of which are slickensided (i.e. polished and striated). Relative
movement between the lenses is complicated, with many local variations. Thrust shears, and
possibly fracture cleavage, also have been noted in these shear zones.
Faults
Faults are fractures in crustal strata along which rocks have been displaced (Fig. 2.8). The
amount of displacement may vary from only a few tens of millimetres to several hundred kilo-
metres. In many faults, the fracture is a clean break; in others, the displacement is not
restricted to a simple fracture, but is developed throughout a fault zone.
The dip and strike of a fault plane can be described in the same way as those of a bedding
plane. The angle of hade is the angle enclosed between the fault plane and the vertical. The
hanging wall of a fault refers to the upper rock surface along which displacement has
occurred, whereas the foot wall is the term given to that below. The vertical shift along a fault
plane is called the throw, and the term heave refers to the horizontal displacement. Where
the displacement along a fault has been vertical, then the terms downthrow and upthrow refer
to the relative movement of strata on opposite sides of the fault plane.
Classification of Faults
A classification of faults can be based on the direction in which movement took place along
the fault plane, on the relative movement of the hanging and foot walls, on the attitude of the
fault in relation to the strata involved and on the fault pattern. If the direction of slippage along
the fault plane is used to distinguish between faults, then three types may be recognized,
namely, dip-slip faults, strike-slip faults and oblique-slip faults. In a dip-slip fault, the slippage
55
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.8
Fault in strata of the Limestone Group, Lower Carboniferous, near Howick, Northumberland, England.
occurred along the dip of the fault, in a strike-slip fault, it took place along the strike and in an
oblique-slip fault, movement occurred diagonally across the fault plane (Fig. 2.9). When the
relative movement of the hanging and foot walls is used as a basis of classification, then
normal, reverse and wrench faults can be recognized. A normal fault is characterized by the
occurrence of the hanging wall on the downthrown side, whereas the foot wall occupies the
downthrown side in a reverse fault. Reverse faulting involves a vertical duplication of strata,
unlike normal faults where the displacement gives rise to a region of barren ground (Fig. 2.9).
In a wrench fault, neither the foot nor the hanging wall have moved up or down in relation to
one another (Fig. 2.9). Considering the attitude of the fault to the strata involved, strike faults,
dip (or cross) faults and oblique faults can be recognized. A strike fault is one that trends par-
allel to the beds it displaces, a dip or cross fault is one that follows the inclination of the strata
and an oblique fault runs at angle with the strike of the rocks it intersects. A classification
based on the pattern produced by a number of faults does not take into account the effects
on the rocks involved. Parallel faults, radial faults, peripheral faults, and en echelon faults are
among the patterns that have been recognized.
56
Chapter 2
Figure 2.9
Types of faults: (a) normal fault, (b) reverse fault, (c) wrench or strike-slip fault, (d) oblique-slip fault. FW = footwall;
HW = hanging wall; AB = throw; BC = heave; f= angle of hade. Arrows show the direction of relative displacement.
In areas that have not undergone intense tectonic deformation, reverse and normal faults
generally dip at angles in excess of 45∞. Their low-angled equivalents, termed thrusts and lags,
respectively, are inclined at less than that figure. Splay faults occur at the extremities of strike-
slip faults, and strike-slip faults are commonly accompanied by numerous smaller parallel
faults. Sinistral and dextral strike-slip faults can be distinguished in the following manner.
When looking across a fault plane, if the displacement on the far side has been to the left, then
it is sinistral, whereas if movement has been to the right, the fault is described as dextral.
Normal faults range in linear extension up to, occasionally, a few hundred kilometres in length.
Generally, the longer faults do not form single fractures throughout their entirety but consist of
a series of fault zones. The net slip on such faults may total over a thousand metres. Normal
faults are commonly quite straight in outline but sometimes they may be sinuous or irregular
with abrupt changes in strike. When a series of normal faults run parallel to one another with
their downthrows all on the same side, the area involved is described as being step faulted
(Fig. 2.10). Horsts and rift structures (graben) are also illustrated in Figure 2.10.
57
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.10
Block diagram illustrating step-faulting, and horst and graben structures.
An overthrust is a thrust fault that has a dip of 10∞or less, and its net slip measures several
kilometres. Overthrusts may be folded or even overturned. As a consequence, when they are
subsequently eroded, remnants of the overthrust rocks may be left as outliers surrounded by
rocks that lay beneath the thrust. These remnant areas are termed klippe, and the area that
separates them from the parent overthrust is referred to as a fenster or a window. The area
that occurs in front of the overthrust is called the foreland.
Criteria for the Recognition of Faults
The abrupt ending of one group of strata against another may be caused by the presence of
a fault, but abrupt changes also occur at unconformities and intrusive contacts. Nevertheless,
it is usually a matter of no great difficulty to distinguish between these three relationships.
Repetition of strata may be caused by faulting, that is, the beds are repeated in the same
order and dip in the same direction, whereas when they are repeated by folding, they recur
in the reverse order and may possess a different inclination (Fig. 2.11a). Omission of strata
suggests that faulting has taken place, although such a feature could occur again as a result
of unconformity (Fig. 2.11b).
Many features are associated with faulting and, consequently, when found, indicate the pres-
ence of a fault. Shear and tension joints frequently are associated with major faults. Shear and
tension joints formed along a fault often are referred to as feather joints because of their barb-
like appearance. Feather joints may be subdivided into pinnate shear joints and pinnate ten-
sion joints. Where pinnate shear planes are closely spaced and involve some displacement,
fracture cleavage is developed.
58
Chapter 2
Figure 2.11
(a) Repetition of bed at the surface (fault parallel with the strike and hading against the dip. (b) Omission of bed at the surface
(fault parallel with the strike and hading with the dip).
Slickensides are polished striated surfaces that occur on a fault plane and are caused by the fric-
tional effects generated by its movement. Only slight movements are required to form slicken-
sides, and their presence has been noted along shear joints. The striations illustrate the general
direction of movement. Very low scarps, sometimes less than a millimetre high, occur perpendi-
cular to the striations and represent small accumulations of material formed as a consequence
of the drag effect created by the movement of the opposing block. The shallow face of the scarp
points in the direction in which the block moved. Sometimes, two or more sets of slickensides,
which usually intersect at an acute angle, may be observed, indicating successive movements
in slightly different directions or a sudden deviation in the movement during one displacement.
Intraformational shears, that is, zones of shearing parallel to bedding, are associated with
faulting. They often occur in clays, mudstones and shales at the contact with sandstones.
Such shear zones tend to die out when traced away from the faults concerned and are prob-
ably formed as a result of flexuring of strata adjacent to faults. A shear zone may consist of
a single polished or slickensided shear plane, whereas a more complex shear zone may be
up to 300 mm in thickness. Intraformational shear zones are not restricted to argillaceous
rocks, for instance, they occur in chalk. Their presence means that the strength of the rock
along the shear zone has been reduced to its residual value.
As a fault is approached, the strata involved frequently exhibit flexures that suggest that the
beds have been dragged into the fault plane by the frictional resistance generated along it.
Indeed, along some large dip-slip faults, the beds may be inclined vertically. A related effect
is seen in faulted gneisses and schists where a pre-existing lineation is strongly turned into
the fault zone and a secondary lineation results.
If the movement along a fault has been severe, the rocks involved may have been crushed,
sheared or pulverized. Where shales or clays have been faulted, the fault zone may be
59
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
occupied by clay gouge. Fault breccias, which consist of a jumbled mass of angular fragments
containing a high proportion of voids, occur when more competent rocks are faulted. Crush
breccias and crush conglomerates develop when rocks are sheared by a regular pattern of
fractures. Movements of greater intensity are responsible for the occurrence of mylonite
along a fault zone (see Chapter 1). The ultimate stage in the intensity of movements is
reached with the formation of pseudotachylite. This looks like glass.
Although a fault may not be observable, its effects may be reflected in the topography (Fig. 2.12).
For example, if blocks are tilted by faulting, a series of scarps are formed. If the rocks on either
Figure 2.12
(a) Fault scarp formed along normal fault. (b) Reverse fault produces a less distinctive scarp. (c) Astrike-slip fault has produced
a crush zone that is exploited by a stream. Drainage that once crossed the fault now is offset.
60
Chapter 2
side of a fault are of different strengths, then a scarp may form along the fault as a result of
differential erosion. Triangular facets occur along a fault scarp associated with an upland region.
They represent the remnants left behind after swift-flowing rivers have cut deep valleys into the
fault scarp. Such deeply carved rivers deposit alluvial cones over the fault scarp. Scarplets are
indicative of active faults and are found near the foot of mountains, where they run parallel to the
base of the range. On the other hand, natural escarpments may be offset by cross faults.
Similarly, stream profiles may be interrupted by faults or, in a region of recent uplift, their courses
may be relatively straight due to them following faults. Springs often occur along faults. A lake
may form if a fault intersects the course of a river and the downthrown block is tilted upstream.
Faults may be responsible for the formation of waterfalls in the path of a stream. Sag pools may
be formed if the downthrown side settles different amounts along the strike of a fault. However,
it must be emphasized that the physiographical features noted above may be developed without
the aid of faulting and, consequently, they do not provide a foolproof indication of such stratal
displacement.
Faults provide paths of escape and they therefore are frequently associated with mineraliza-
tion, silicification and igneous phenomena. For example, dykes are often injected along
faults.
Discontinuities
A discontinuity represents a plane of weakness within a rock mass across which the rock
material is structurally discontinuous. Although discontinuities are not necessarily planes of
separation, most in fact are and they possess little or no tensile strength. Discontinuities vary
in size from small fissures on the one hand to huge faults on the other. The most common
discontinuities are joints and bedding planes (Fig. 2.13). Other important discontinuities are
planes of cleavage and schistosity, fissures and faults.
Nomenclature of Joints
Joints are fractures along which little or no displacement has occurred and are present within
all types of rocks. At the ground surface, joints may open as a consequence of denudation,
especially weathering, or the dissipation of residual stress.
A group of joints that run parallel to each other are termed a joint set, whereas two or more
joint sets that intersect at a more or less constant angle are referred to as a joint system.
If one set of joints is dominant, then the joints are known as primary joints, and the other set
or sets of joints are termed secondary. If joints are planar and parallel or sub-parallel, they are
61
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.13
Discontinuities in sandstone of Carboniferous age, near Mansfield, England.
described as systematic; conversely, when their orientation is irregular, they are termed
nonsystematic.
Joints can be divided, on the basis of size, into master joints that penetrate several rock hori-
zons and persist for hundreds of metres; major joints that are smaller joints but which are still
well-defined structures; and minor joints that do not transcend bedding planes. Lastly, minute
fractures occasionally occur in finely bedded sediments, and such micro-joints may be only
a few millimetres in size.
Joints may be associated with folds and faults, having developed towards the end of an
active tectonic phase or when such a phase has subsided. However, joints do not appear to
form parallel to other planes of shear failure such as normal and thrust faults. The orientation
of joint sets in relation to folds depends on their size, the type and size of the fold and the
thickness and competence of the rocks involved. At times, the orientation of the joint sets can
be related directly to the folding and may be defined in terms of the a, b and c axes of the
“tectonic cross” (Fig. 2.14). Those joints that cut the fold at right angles to the axis are called
ac or cross joints. The bc or longitudinal joints are perpendicular to the latter joints, and
62
Chapter 2
Figure 2.14
Geometric orientation of longitudinal, cross and diagonal joints relative to fold axis and to principal axes of stress.
diagonal or oblique joints run at an angle to both the ac and bc joints. Diagonal joints are
classified as shear joints, whereas acand bcjoints are regarded as tension joints.
Joints are formed through failure of rock masses in tension, in shear or through some combina-
tion of both. Rupture surfaces formed by extension tend to be clean and rough with little detritus.
They tend to follow minor lithological variations. Simple surfaces of shearing are generally
smooth and contain considerable detritus. They are unaffected by local lithological changes.
Price (1966) contended that the majority of joints are post-compressional structures, formed
as a result of the dissipation of residual stress after folding has occurred. Some spatially
restricted small joints associated with folds, such as radial tension joints, are probably initiated
during folding. Such dissipation of the residual stresses occurs in the immediate neighbour-
hood of a joint plane so that a very large number of joints need to form in order to dissipate
the stresses throughout a large volume.
Joints also are formed in other ways. For example, joints develop within igneous rocks when
they cool down, and in wet sediments when they dry out. The most familiar of these are the
columnar joints in lava flows, sills and some dykes. The cross joints, longitudinal joints, diag-
onal joints and flat-lying joints associated with large granitic intrusions have been referred to
in Chapter 1. Sheet or mural joints have a similar orientation to flat-lying joints. When they are
closely spaced and well developed, they impart a pseudostratification to the host rock. It has
been noted that the frequency of sheet jointing is related to the depth of overburden, in other
63
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
words, the thinner the rock cover, the more pronounced the sheeting. This suggests a con-
nection between the removal of overburden by denudation and the development of sheet-
ing. Indeed, such joints have often developed suddenly during quarrying operations. It may
well be that some granitic intrusions contain considerable residual strain energy and that
with the gradual removal of load the residual stresses are dissipated by the formation of
sheet joints.
Description of Discontinuous Rock Masses
The shear strength of a rock mass and its deformability are influenced very much by the dis-
continuity pattern, its geometry and how well it is developed. Observation of discontinuity
spacing, whether in a field exposure or in a core stick, aids appraisal of rock mass structure.
In sedimentary rocks, bedding planes are usually the dominant discontinuities, and the rock
mass can be described as shown in Table 2.1. The same boundaries can be used to describe
the spacing of joints (Anon, 1977a).
Systematic sets should be distinguished from nonsystematic sets when recording discontinu-
ities in the field. Barton (1978) suggested that the number of sets of discontinuities at any
particular location could be described in the following manner:
1. Massive, occasional random joints
2. One discontinuity set
3. One discontinuity set plus random
4. Two discontinuity sets
5. Two discontinuity sets plus random
6. Three discontinuity sets
7. Three discontinuity sets plus random
8. Four or more discontinuity sets
9. Crushed rock, earth-like
Table 2.1. Description of bedding plane and joint spacing (after Anon, 1977a). With kind
permission of the Geological Society
Description of bedding Description of joint
plane spacing spacing Limits of spacing
Very thickly bedded Extremely wide Over 2 m
Thickly bedded Very wide 0.6–2 m
Medium bedded Wide 0.2–0.6 m
Thinly bedded Moderately wide 60 mm–0.2 m
Very thinly bedded Moderately narrow 20–60 mm
Laminated Narrow 6–20 mm
Thinly laminated Very narrow Under 6 mm
64
Chapter 2
As joints represent surfaces of weakness, the larger and more closely spaced they
are, the more influential they become in reducing the effective strength of a rock mass. The
persistence of a joint plane refers to its continuity. This is one of the most difficult properties
to quantify because joints normally continue beyond the rock exposure and, consequently,
it is impossible to estimate their continuity. Nevertheless, Barton (1978) suggested that the
modal trace lengths measured for each discontinuity set can be described as follows:
Very low persistence Less than 1 m
Low persistence 1 to 3 m
Medium persistence 3 to10 m
High persistence 10 to 20 m
Very high persistence Greater than 20 m
Block size provides an indication of how a rock mass is likely to behave, because block size
and interblock shear strength determine the mechanical performance of a rock mass under
given conditions of stress. The following descriptive terms have been recommended for the
description of rock masses in order to convey an impression of the shape and size of blocks
of rock material (Barton, 1978):
1. Massive — few joints or very wide spacing
2. Blocky — approximately equidimensional
3. Tabular — one dimension considerably shorter than the other two
4. Columnar — one dimension considerably larger than the other two
5. Irregular — wide variations of block size and shape
6. Crushed — heavily jointed to “sugar cube”
The orientation of the short or long dimensions should be specified in the columnar and
tabular blocks, respectively. The actual block size may be described by using the terms
given in Table 2.2 (Anon, 1977a).
Discontinuities, especially joints, may be open or closed (Table 2.3). How open they are is of
importance in relation to the overall strength and permeability of a rock mass, and this often
depends largely on the amount of weathering that the rocks have suffered. Some joints may be
partially or completely filled. The type and amount of filling not only influence the effectiveness
with which the opposing joint surfaces are bound together, thereby affecting the strength of the
rock mass, but also influence permeability. If the infilling is sufficiently thick, the walls of the joint
will not be in contact and, hence, the strength of the joint plane will be that of the infill material.
Materials such as clay or sand may have been introduced into a joint opening. Mineralization is
frequently associated with joints. This may effectively cement a joint; however, in other cases,
the mineralizing agent may have altered and weakened the rocks along the joint conduit.
65
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 2.2. Block size and equivalent discontinuity spacing (after Anon, 1977). With kind
permission of the Geological Society
Volumetric
Equivalent discontinuity joint count (J )*
v
Term Block size spacings in blocky rock (joints/m3)
Very large Over 8 m3 Extremely wide Less than 1
Large 0.2–8 m3 Very wide 1–3
Medium 0.008–0.2 m3 Wide 3–10
Small 0.0002–0.008 m3 Moderately wide 10–30
Very small Less than 0.0002 m3 Less than moderately wide Over 30
*After Barton (1978).
The nature of the opposing joint surfaces also influences rock mass behaviour because the
smoother they are, the more easily can movement take place along them. However, joint sur-
faces are usually rough and may be slickensided. Hence, the nature of a joint surface may be
considered in relation to its waviness, roughness and the condition of the walls. Waviness and
roughness differ in terms of scale and their effect on the shear strength of a joint. Waviness
refers to first-order asperities that appear as undulations of the joint surface and are not likely
to shear off during movement. Therefore, the effects of waviness do not change with displace-
ments along the joint surface. Waviness modifies the apparent angle of dip but not the fric-
tional properties of the discontinuity. On the other hand, roughness refers to second-order
asperities that are sufficiently small to be sheared off during movement. Increased roughness
of the discontinuity walls results in an increased effective friction angle along the joint surface.
These effects diminish or disappear when infill is present.
A set of terms to describe roughness has been suggested by Barton (1978), based upon
two scales of observation, namely, small scale (several centimetres) and intermediate scale
Table 2.3. Description of the aperture of discontinuity surfaces
Anon (1977a) Barton (1978)
Description Width of aperture Description Width of aperture
Tight Zero Very tight Less than 0.1 mm
Extremely narrow Less than 2 mm Closed Tight 0.1–0.25 mm
Very narrow 2–6 mm Partly open 0.25–0.5 mm
Narrow 6–20 mm Open 0.5–2.5 mm
Moderately narrow 20–60 mm Gapped Moderately wide 2.5–10 mm
Moderately wide 60–200 mm Wide Over 10 mm
Wide Over 200 mm Very wide 10–100 mm
Open Extremely wide 100–1000 mm
Cavernous Over 1 m
66
Chapter 2
(several metres). The intermediate scale of roughness is divided into stepped, undulating and
planar profiles, and the small scale of roughness, superimposed upon the former, includes
the rough (or irregular), smooth and slickensided categories. The direction of the slickensides
should be noted as shear strength may vary with direction. Barton recognized the classes
shown in Figure 2.15.
Joint matching refers to the degree to which the profiles of opposing discontinuity surfaces fit
with each other. Various processes such as weathering, shear displacement or loading may
affect the extent to which discontinuity surfaces match. Zhao (1997a) introduced a joint
matching coefficient, JMC, which couples with the joint roughness coefficient, JRC(see the
following text), which together provide a parameter for correlating joint surface properties.
The value of JMCranges from 0 to 1, depending on the matching proportion of the surface area
of the discontinuity to the total surface area. A JMCvalue of 1 represents a perfectly matched
discontinuity, whereas a value near zero represents minimum surface contact. The values of
JMCare frequently in the range 0.5–0.8, depending on the degree of alteration along a dis-
continuity. The aperture of a discontinuity with rough surfaces increases with increasing mis-
matching and, hence, generally produces a greater amount of closure under compression.
Also, a less matched discontinuity tends to be characterized by lower discontinuity stiffness
Figure 2.15
Typical roughness profiles and suggested nomenclature. The length of each profile is in the range 1–10 m. The vertical and
horizontal scales are equal (after Barton, 1978). With kind permission of Elsevier.
67
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
and lower shear strength. Measurement of the JMCcan be carried out by profiling opposing
surfaces of a discontinuity with a profile gauge.
The compressive strength of the rock comprising the walls of a discontinuity is a very important
component of shear strength and deformability, especially if the walls are in direct rock-to-rock
contact. Weathering (and alteration) frequently is concentrated along the walls of discontinu-
ities, thereby reducing their strength. The weathered material can be assessed in terms of its
grade and index tests (see Chapter 3). Samples of wall rock can be tested in the laboratory, not
just for strength, but if they are highly weathered, also for swelling and durability.
Seepage of water through rock masses usually takes place via the discontinuities, although
in some sedimentary rocks, seepage through the pores also may play an important role. The
groundwater level, probable seepage paths and approximate water pressures frequently pro-
vide an indication of ground stability or construction problems. Barton (1978) suggested that
seepage from open or filled discontinuities could be assessed according to the descriptive
scheme shown in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4. Seepage from discontinuities (after Barton, 1978). With kind permission of Elsevier
Open discontinuities Filled discontinuities
Seepage
rating Description Description
(1) The discontinuity is very tight and The filling material is heavily
dry; water flow along it does not consolidated and dry; significant flow
appear possible. appears unlikely due to very low
permeability.
(2) The discontinuity is dry with no The filling materials are damp, but no
evidence of water flow. free water is present.
(3) The discontinuity is dry but shows The filling materials are wet; occasional
evidence of water flow, i.e. rust drops of water.
staining, etc.
(4) The discontinuity is damp but no The filling materials show signs of
free water is present. outwash, continuous flow of water
(estimate l min- 1).
(5) The discontinuity shows seepage, The filling materials are washed out
occasional drops of water but no locally; considerable water flow along
continuous flow. outwash channels (estimate l min- 1and
describe pressure, i.e. low, medium,
high).
(6) The discontinuity shows a The filling materials are washed out
continuous flow of water (estimate completely; very high water pressures
l min- 1and describe pressure, are experienced, especially on first
i.e. low, medium, high). exposure (estimate l min- 1and
describe pressure).
68
Chapter 2
Strength of Discontinuous Rock Masses and its Assessment
The strength of a discontinuous rock mass is governed by the strength of the intact blocks and
the freedom of the blocks to rotate and slide under different stress conditions (Hoek and Brown,
1997). This freedom depends on the shape of the blocks and the condition of the surfaces that
separate them. Discontinuities in a rock mass reduce its effective shear strength, at least in a
direction parallel to the discontinuities. Hence, the strength of discontinuous rocks is highly
anisotropic. Discontinuities offer no resistance to tension, whereas they offer high resistance to
compression. Nevertheless, they may deform under compression if there are crushable asper-
ities, compressible filling or apertures along the joint, or if the wall rock is altered. When a jointed
rock mass undergoes shearing, this may be accompanied by dilation, especially at low
pressures, and small shear displacements probably occur as shear stress builds up.
Barton (1976) proposed the following empirical expression for deriving the shear strength, t,
along joint surfaces:
t= s tan (JRC log (JCS/s) + f ) (2.1)
n 10 n b
where s is the effective normal stress, JRCis the joint roughness coefficient, JCSis the joint
n
wall compressive strength, and f is the basic friction angle. According to Barton, the values of
b
JRC range from 0 to 20, from the smoothest to the roughest surface (Fig. 2.16). The JRC is
constant only for a fixed joint length. Generally, longer profiles (of the same joint) have lower
JRC values. Indeed, Barton and Bandis (1980) suggested that mobilization of peak strength
along a joint surface seems to be a measure of the distance the joint has to be displaced such
that asperities are brought into contact. The JCS is equal to the unconfined compressive
strength of the rock if the joint is unweathered. This may be reduced by up to 75% when the
walls of the joints are weathered. Both these factors are related because smooth-walled joints
are less affected by the value of JCS, as failure of asperities plays a less important role. The
smoother the walls of the joints, the more significant is the part played by its mineralogy, f . The
b
experience gained from rock mechanics indicates that under low effective normal stress levels,
such as those that occur in engineering, the shear strength of joints can vary within relatively
wide limits. The maximum effective normal stress acting across joints and considered critical for
stability lies, according to Barton, in the range 0.1–2.0 MPa. Zhao (1997b) maintained that the
Barton criterion (Eq. 2.1) tends to overpredict the shear strength of discontinuities and that it
should be modified to take account of the JMCas follows:
t= s tan [JRC - JMC log (JCS/s) + f ] (2.2)
n 10 n b
The shear strength of open discontinuities that are occupied by soft material may be signifi-
cantly less than if the opposing surfaces of the discontinuities were in close contact. In the case
69
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.16
Roughness profiles and corresponding range of JRC values associated with each one (after Barton, 1976). With kind
permission of Elsevier.
of a rough or undulating discontinuity surface, the thickness of the soft filling has to exceed the
amplitude of the undulations if the shear strength is to be reduced to that of the filling.
Discontinuities and Rock Quality Indices
Several attempts have been made to relate the numerical intensity of discontinuities to the qual-
ityof unweathered rock masses and to quantify their effect on deformability. For example, the
concept of rock quality designation, RQD, was introduced by Deere (1964). It is based on the
percentage core recovery when drilling rock with NX (57.2 mm) or larger-diameter diamond-
core drills. Assuming that a consistent standard of drilling can be maintained, the percentage
of solid core obtained depends on the strength and number of discontinuities in the rock mass
concerned. The RQDis the sum of the core sticks in excess of 100 mm, expressed as a per-
centage of the total length of core drilled. However, the RQD does not take account of the
joint opening and condition, a further disadvantage being that with discontinuity spacing
greater than 100 mm, the quality is excellent, irrespective of the actual spacing (Table 2.5).
70
Chapter 2
Table 2.5. Classification of rock quality in relation to the incidence of discontinuities
Fracture Velocity
Quality frequency ratio
classification RQD (%) per metre Mass factor (j) (V /V )
cf cl
Very poor 0–25 Over 15 0.0–0.2
Poor 25–50 15–8 Less than 0.2 0.2–0.4
Fair 50–75 8–5 0.2–0.5 0.4–0.6
Good 75–90 5–1 0.5–0.8 0.6–0.8
Excellent 90–100 Less than 1 0.8–1.0 0.8–1.0
This particular difficulty can be overcome by using the fracture spacing index. This simply
refers to the frequency per metre, with which fractures occur within a rock mass (Table 2.5).
The effect of discontinuities in a rock mass can be estimated by comparing the in situ com-
pressional wave velocity, V , with the laboratory sonic velocity, V , of an intact core sample
cf cl
obtained from the same rock mass. This gives the velocity ratio V /V . The difference in
cf cl
these two velocities is caused by the discontinuities that exist in the field. For a high-quality
massive rock with only a few tight joints, the velocity ratio approaches unity. As the degree
of jointing and fracturing becomes more severe, the velocity ratio is reduced (Table 2.5). The
sonic velocity is determined for the core sample in the laboratory under an axial stress equal
to the computed overburden stress at the depth from which the rock material was taken, and
at a moisture content equivalent to that of the in situ rock. The field seismic velocity is deter-
mined preferably by uphole or crosshole seismic measurements in drillholes or test adits,
since by using these measurements it is possible to explore individual homogeneous zones
more precisely than by surface refraction surveys.
An estimate of the numerical value of the deformation modulus of a jointed rock mass can be
obtained from various in situ tests (see Chapter 7). The values derived from such tests are
always smaller than those determined in the laboratory from intact core specimens. The more
heavily the rock mass is jointed, the larger the discrepancy between the two values. Thus, if
the ratio between these two values of deformation modulus is obtained from a number of
locations on a site, the engineer can evaluate the rock mass quality. Accordingly, the concept
of the rock mass factor, j, was introduced by Hobbs (1975), who defined it as the ratio of
deformability of a rock mass to that of the intact rock (Table 2.5).
Recording Discontinuity Surveys
Before a discontinuity survey commences, the area in question must be mapped geologically
to determine rock types and delineate major structures. It is only after becoming familiar with
71
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
the geology that the most efficient and accurate way of conducting a discontinuity survey can
be devised. A comprehensive review of the procedure to be followed during a discontinuity
survey has been provided by Barton (1978) and by Priest (1993).
One of the most widely used methods for collecting discontinuity data is simply by direct
measurement on the ground. A direct survey can be carried out subjectively in that only
those structures that appear to be important are measured and recorded. In a subjective
survey, the effort can be concentrated on the apparently significant joint sets. Nevertheless,
there is a risk of overlooking sets that might be important. Conversely, in an objective
survey, all discontinuities intersecting a fixed line or area of the rock face are measured
and recorded.
Several methods have been used for carrying out direct discontinuity surveys. In the fracture
set mapping technique, all discontinuities occurring in zones of 6 m by 2 m, spaced at 30-m
intervals along the face, are recorded. Alternatively, using a series of line scans provides a
satisfactory method of joint surveying. The technique involves extending a metric tape across
an exposure, levelling the tape and then securing it to the face. Two other scan lines are set
out as near as possible at right angles to the first, one more or less vertical and the other hor-
izontal. The distance along a tape at which each discontinuity intersects is noted, as is the
direction of the pole to each discontinuity (this provides an indication of the dip direction). The
dip of the pole from the vertical is recorded as this is equivalent to the dip of the plane from
the horizontal. The strike and dip directions of discontinuities in the field can be measured
with a compass and the amount of dip with a clinometer. Measurement of the length of a dis-
continuity provides information on its continuity. It has been suggested that measurements
should be taken over distances of about 30 m, and to ensure that the survey is representa-
tive, the measurements should be continuous over that distance. A minimum of at least 200
readings per locality is recommended to ensure statistical reliability. A summary of the other
details that should be recorded about discontinuities is given in Figure 2.17.
The information gathered by the scanline method can be supplemented with data from orien-
tated cores from drillholes. The value of data on discontinuities gathered from orientated cores
from drillholes depends in part on the quality of the rock concerned, in that poor-quality rock
is likely to be lost during drilling. However, it is impossible to assess the persistence, degree
of separation or the nature of the joint surfaces. What is more, infill material, especially if it is
soft, is not recovered by the drilling operations.
Core orientation can be achieved by using a core orientator or by integral sampling (Fig. 2.18a and
b, respectively). In a core orientator, the teeth clamp the instrument in position inside the core barrel
until released by pressure on the conical probe. The housing contains a soft aluminium ring against
which a ball bearing is indented by pressure from the conical probe, thus marking the bottom of the
72
73
Chapter
2
Figure 2.17
Discontinuity survey data sheet (after Anon, 1977a). With kind permission of the Geological Society.
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 2.18
(a) Details of a core orientator. The probes take up the profiles of the core stub left by the previous drilling run and are locked
in position when the spring loaded cone is released. (b) Stages of the integral sampling method.
hole position. The probe is released by pressure against the core stub and, when released,
locks the probe in position and releases the clamping teeth to allow the instrument to ride up
inside the barrel ahead of the core entering the barrel. In the first stage of integral sampling, a
drillhole (diameter D) is drilled to a depth where the integral sample is to be obtained, then
another hole (diameter D¢) coaxial with the former and with the same length as the required
sample is drilled, into which a reinforcing bar is placed. The bar then is grouted to the rock mass.
Drilling is then resumed to obtain the integral sample. The method has been used with success
in all types of rock masses, from massive to highly weathered varieties, and provides informa-
tion on the spacing and orientation, as well as the opening and infilling of discontinuities.
Drillhole inspection techniques include the use of drillhole periscopes, drillhole cameras or
closed-circuit television. The drillhole periscope affords direct inspection and can be orientated
from outside the hole. However, its effective use is limited to about 30 m. The drillhole camera
also can be orientated prior to photographing a section of the wall of a drillhole. The televi-
sion camera provides a direct view of the drillhole, and a recording can be made on video-
tape. These three systems are limited in that they require relatively clear conditions and,
hence, may be of little use below the water table, particularly if the water in the drillhole is
murky. The televiewer produces an acoustic picture of the drillhole wall. One of its advantages
is that drillholes need not be flushed prior to its use.
74
Chapter 2
Figure 2.19
Representation of structural data concerning four possible slope failure modes plotted on equal area stereonets as poles, which
are contoured to show relative concentration, and great circles. (a) Circular failure in heavily jointed rock with no identifiable
structural pattern. (b) Plane failure in highly ordered structure such as slate. (c) Wedge failure on two intersecting sets of joints.
(d)Toppling failure caused by steeply dipping joints (after Hoek and Bray, 1981). With kind permission of the Institute of Materials,
Minerals and Mining.
Many data relating to discontinuities can be obtained from photographs of exposures.
Photographs may be taken looking horizontally at the rock mass from the ground, or they may
be taken from the air looking vertically, or occasionally obliquely, down at the outcrop. These
photographs may or may not have survey control. Uncontrolled photographs are taken using
hand-held cameras. Stereo-pairs are obtained by taking two photographs of the same face
from positions about 5% of the distance of the face apart, along a line parallel to the face.
Delineation of major discontinuity patterns and preliminary subdivision of the face into struc-
tural zones can be made from these photographs. Unfortunately, data cannot be transferred
75
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
with accuracy from them onto maps and plans. Conversely, discontinuity data can be located
accurately on maps and plans by using controlled photographs. Controlled photographs are
obtained by aerial photography with complementary ground control or by ground-based pho-
totheodolite surveys. Aerial and ground-based photographs are usually taken with panchro-
matic film but the use of colour and infrared techniques is becoming more popular. Aerial
photographs, with a suitable scale, have proved useful in the investigation of discontinuities.
Photographs taken with a phototheodolite also can be used with a stereo-comparator, which
produces a stereoscopic model. Measurements of the locations or points in the model can
be made with an accuracy of approximately 1 in 5000 of the mean object distance. As a con-
sequence, a point on a face photographed from 50 m can be located to an accuracy of 10 mm.
In this way the frequency, orientation and continuity of discontinuities can be assessed.
Such techniques prove particularly useful when faces that are inaccessible or unsafe have to
be investigated.
Recording Discontinuity Data
Data from a discontinuity survey are usually plotted on a stereographic projection. The use of
spherical projections, commonly the Schmidt or Wulf net, means that traces of the planes on
the surface of the “reference sphere” can be used to define the dips and dip directions of
discontinuity planes. In other words, the inclination and orientation of a particular plane is
represented by a great circle or a pole, normal to the plane, which are traced on an over-
lay placed over the stereonet. The method whereby great circles or poles are plotted on a
stereogram has been explained by Hoek and Bray (1981). When recording field observa-
tions of the direction and amount of dip of discontinuities, it is convenient to plot the poles
rather than the great circles. The poles then can be contoured in order to provide an
expression of orientation concentration. This affords a qualitative appraisal of the influence
of the discontinuitieson the engineering behaviour of the rock mass concerned (Fig. 2.19).
76
Chapter 3
Surface Processes
All landmasses are continually being worn away or denuded by weathering and
erosion,the agents of erosion being the sea, rivers, wind and ice. The detrital prod-
ucts resulting from denudation are transported by water, wind, ice or the action of
gravity, and are ultimately deposited. In this manner, the surface features of the Earth are
gradually, but constantly, changing. As landscapes are developing continually, it is possible
to distinguish the successive stages of their evolution. These stages have been termed
youth, maturity and senility. However, the form of landscape that arises during any one of
these stages is conditioned partly by the processes of denudation to which the area is sub-
jected, and partly by the structure of the rocks on which the landforms are being developed.
Earth movements and type of climate also play a significant role in landscape development.
Weathering
The process of weathering represents an adjustment of the minerals of which a rock is com-
posed to the conditions prevailing on the surface of the Earth. As such, weathering of rocks
is brought about by physical disintegration, chemical decomposition and biological activity. It
weakens the rock fabric and exaggerates any structural weaknesses, all of which further aid
the breakdown processes. A rock may become more friable as a result of the development
of fractures both between and within mineral grains. The agents of weathering, unlike those
of erosion, do not themselves provide for the transportation of debris from the surface of a
rock mass. Therefore, unless the rock waste is otherwise removed, it eventually acts as a
protective cover, preventing further weathering. If weathering is to be continuous, fresh rock
exposures must be constantly revealed, which means that the weathered debris must be
removed by the action of gravity, running water, wind or moving ice.
Weathering also is controlled by the presence of discontinuities in that they provide access
into a rock mass for the agents of weathering. Some of the earliest effects of weathering are
seen along discontinuity surfaces. Weathering then proceeds inwards so that the rock mass
may develop a marked heterogeneity with corestones of relatively unweathered material
within a highly weathered matrix (Fig. 3.1). Ultimately, the whole of the rock mass can be
reduced to a residual soil. Discontinuities in carbonate rock masses are enlarged by dissolu-
tion, leading to the development of sinkholes and cavities within the rock mass.
77
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.1
Highly weathered basalt, northern Lesotho. Note onion skin weathering.
The rate at which weathering proceeds depends not only on the vigour of the weathering agents
but also on the durability of the rock mass concerned. This, in turn, is governed by the
mineralogical composition, texture, porosity and strength of the rock on the one hand, and
the incidence of discontinuities within the rock mass on the other. Hence, the response of a
rock mass to weathering is directly related to its internal surface area and average pore size.
Coarse-grained rocks generally weather more rapidly than fine-grained ones. The degree of
interlocking between component minerals is also a particularly important textural factor, since the
more strongly a rock is bonded together, the greater is its resistance to weathering. The close-
ness of the interlocking of grains governs the porosity of the rock. This, in turn, determines
the amount of water it can hold, and hence, the more porous the rock, the more susceptibleit
is to chemical attack. Also, the amount of water that a rock contains influences mechanical
breakdown, especially in terms of frost action. Nonetheless, deep-weathered profiles usually
have been developed over lengthy periods of time. The type and rate of weathering varies
from one climatic regime to another. In humid regions, chemical and chemico-biological
processes are generally much more significant than those of mechanical disintegration. The
degree and rate of weathering in humid regions depends primarily on the temperature
andamount of moisture available. An increase in temperature causes an increase in weath-
ering. If the temperature is high, then weathering is extremely active; an increase of 10∞C in
78
Chapter 3
humid regions more than doubles the rate of chemical reaction. On the other hand, in dry air,
chemical decay of rocks takes place very slowly.
Weathering leads to a decrease in density and strength, and to increasing deformability. An
increase in the mass permeability frequently occurs during the initial stages of weathering
due to the development of fractures, but if clay material is produced as minerals breakdown,
then the permeability may be reduced. Widening of discontinuities in carbonate rock masses
by dissolution leads to a progressive increase in permeability.
Mechanical Weathering
Mechanical or physical weathering is particularly effective in climatic regions that experience
significant diurnal changes of temperature. This does not necessarily imply a large range of
temperature, as frost and thaw action can proceed where the range is limited.
Alternate freeze–thaw action causes cracks, fissures, joints and some pore spaces to be
widened. As the process advances, angular rock debris is gradually broken from the parent
body. Frost susceptibility depends on the expansion in volume that occurs when water moves
into the ice phase, the degree of saturation of water in the pore system, the critical pore size,
the amount of pore space, and the continuity of the pore system. In particular, the pore struc-
ture governs the degree of saturation and the magnitude of stresses that can be generated
upon freezing (Bell, 1993). When water turns to ice, it increases in volume by up to 9%, thus
giving rise to an increase in pressure within the pores it occupies. This action is further
enhanced by the displacement of pore water away from the developing ice front. Once ice
has formed, the ice pressures rapidly increase with decreasing temperature, so that at
approximately - 22∞C, ice can exert a pressure of up to 200 MPa. Usually, coarse-grained
rocks withstand freezing better than fine-grained types. The critical pore size for freeze–thaw
durability appears to be about 0.005 mm. In other words, rocks with larger mean pore diam-
eters allow outward drainage and escape of fluid from the frontal advance of the ice line
and, therefore, are less frost susceptible. Fine-grained rocks that have 5% sorbed water are
often very susceptible to frost damage, whereas those containing less than 1% are very
durable. Nonetheless, a rock may fail if it is completely saturated with pore water when
it is frozen. Indeed, it appears that there is a critical moisture content, which tends to
vary between 75 and 96% of the volume of the pores, above which porous rocks fail. The
rapidity with which the critical moisture content is reached is governed by the initial degree of
saturation.
The mechanical effects of weathering are well displayed in hot deserts, where wide diurnal
ranges of temperature cause rocks to expand and contract. Because rocks are poor conductors
of heat, these effects are mainly localized in their outer layers where alternate expansion
79
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.2
Weathering of granite near Grunau, Namibia.
andcontraction creates stresses that eventually rupture the rock. In this way, flakes of rock
break away from the parent material, the process being termed exfoliation. The effects of
exfoliation are concentrated at the corners and edges of rocks so that their outcrops gradually
become rounded (Fig. 3.2). However, in hot semi-arid regions, exfoliation can take place on
a large scale with large slabs becoming detached from the parent rock mass. Furthermore,
minerals possess different coefficients of expansion, and differential expansion within a
polymineralic rock fabric generates stresses at grain contacts and can lead to granular
disintegration.
There are three ways whereby salts within a rock can cause its mechanical breakdown: by
pressure of crystallization, by hydration pressure, and by differential thermal expansion.
Under certain conditions, some salts may crystallize or recrystallize to different hydrates that
occupy a larger space (being less dense) and exert additional pressure, that is, hydration
pressure. The crystallization pressure depends on the temperature and degree of supersat-
uration of the solution, whereas the hydration pressure depends on the ambient temperature
and relative humidity. Calculated crystallization pressures provide an indication of the potential
pressures that may develop during crystallization in narrow closed channels (see Chapter 6).
Crystallization of freely soluble salts such as sodium chloride, sodium sulphate or sodium
80
Chapter 3
Figure 3.3
Honeycomb weathering in sandstone of Jurassic age, Isle of Skye, Scotland.
hydroxide often leads to the crumbling of the surface of a rock such as limestone or
sandstone. Salt action can give rise to honeycomb weathering in porous limestone or sand-
stone possessing a calcareous cement (Fig. 3.3).
Chemical and Biological Weathering
Chemical weathering leads to mineral alteration and the solution of rocks. Alteration is brought
about principally by oxidation, hydration, hydrolysis and carbonation, whereas solution is
brought about by acidified or alkalized waters. Chemical weathering also aids rock disinte-
gration by weakening the rock fabric and by emphasizing any structural weaknesses, however
slight, that it possesses. When decomposition occurs within a rock, the altered material
frequently occupies a greater volume than that from which it was derived and, in the process,
internal stresses are generated. If this expansion occurs in the outer layers of a rock, then it
eventually causes them to peel off from the parent body.
In dry air, rocks decay very slowly. The presence of moisture hastens the rate of decay,
firstly, because water is itself an effective agent of weathering and, secondly, because it holds
in solution substances that react with the component minerals of the rock. The most impor-
tant of these substances are free oxygen, carbon dioxide, organic acids and nitrogen acids.
81
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Free oxygen is an important agent in the decay of all rocks that contain oxidizable substances,
iron and sulphur being especially suspect. The rate of oxidation is quickened by the presence
of water; indeed, it may enter into the reaction itself, for example, as in the formation of
hydrates. However, its role is chiefly that of a catalyst. Carbonic acid is produced when
carbon dioxide is dissolved in water, and it may possess a pH value of about 5.7. The principal
source of carbon dioxide is not the atmosphere but the air contained in the pore spaces in the
soil where its proportion may be a hundred or so times greater than it is in the atmosphere.
An abnormal concentration of carbon dioxide is released when organic material decays.
Furthermore, humic acids are formed by the decay of humus in soil waters; they ordinarily
have pH values between 4.5 and 5.0, but they may occasionally be less than 4.0.
The simplest reactions that take place on chemical weathering are the solution of soluble miner-
als and the addition of water to substances to form hydrates. Solution commonly involves ioniza-
tion, for example, this takes place when gypsum and carbonate rocks are weathered. Hydration
takes place among some substances, a common example being gypsum and anhydrite:
CaSO +2HO Æ CaSO.2HO
4 2 4 2
(anhydrite) (gypsum)
This reaction produces an increase in volume of approximately 6% and, accordingly, causes the
enclosing rocks to be wedged further apart. Iron oxides and hydrates are conspicuous products
of weathering, usually the oxides are a shade of red and the hydrates yellow to dark brown.
Sulphur compounds are oxidized by weathering. Because of the hydrolysis of the dissolved
metal ion, solutions forming from the oxidation of sulphides are acidic. For instance, when
pyrite is oxidized initially, ferrous sulphate and sulphuric acid are formed. Further oxidation
leads to the formation of ferric sulphate. The formation of anhydrous ferrous sulphate can
give rise to a volume increase of about 350%. Very insoluble ferric oxide or hydrated oxide
is formed if highly acidic conditions are produced. Sulphuric acid may react with calcite to give
gypsum that involves an expansion in volume of around 100%.
Perhaps the most familiar example of a rock prone to chemical attack is limestone.
Limestones are chiefly composed of calcium carbonate. Aqueous dissolution of calcium car-
bonate introduces the carbonate ion into water, that is, CO combines with H to form the
3
stable bicarbonate, H CO :
2 3
CaCO +HCO Æ Ca(HCO)
3 2 3 32
In water with a temperature of 25∞C, the solubility of calcium carbonate ranges from 0.01 to
0.05 g l- 1, depending on the degree of saturation with carbon dioxide. Dolostone is somewhat
82
Chapter 3
less soluble than limestone. When limestone is subject to dissolution, any insoluble material
present in it remains behind.
Weathering of the silicate minerals is primarily a process of hydrolysis. Much of the silica that
is released by weathering forms silicic acid but, when liberated in large quantities, some of it
may form colloidal or amorphous silica. Mafic silicates usually decay more rapidly than felsic
silicates and, in the process, they release magnesium, iron and lesser amounts of calciumand
alkalies. Olivine is particularly unstable, decomposing to form serpentine, which forms talc
and carbonates on further weathering. Chlorite is the commonest alteration product of augite
(the principal pyroxene) and of hornblende (the principal amphibole).
When subjected to chemical weathering, feldspars decompose to form clay minerals, which
are, consequently, the most abundant residual products. The process is brought about by the
hydrolysing action of weakly carbonated water that leaches the bases out of the feldspars
and produces clays in colloidal form. The alkalies are removed in solution as carbonates from
orthoclase (K CO ) and albite (Na CO ), and as bicarbonate from anorthite [Ca(HCO ) ].
2 3 2 3 32
Some silica is hydrolysed to form silicic acid. Although the exact mechanism of the process
is not fully understood, the following equation is an approximation towards the truth:
2KAlSiO +6HO +CO Æ AlSiO(OH) +4HSiO +KCO
3 6 2 2 2 2 5 4 2 4 2 3
(orthoclase) (kaolinite)
The colloidal clay eventually crystallizes as an aggregate of minute clay minerals. Deposits
of kaolin are formed when percolating acidified waters decompose the feldspars contained in
granitic rocks.
Clays are hydrated aluminium silicates, and when they are subjected to severe chemical
weathering in tropical regimes, notably with wet and dry seasons, they break down to form
laterite or bauxite. The process involves the removal of siliceous material, and this is again
brought about by the action of carbonated waters. Intensive leaching of soluble mineral
matter from surface rocks takes place during the wet season. During the subsequent dry
season, groundwater is drawn to the surface by capillary action, and minerals are precipitated
there as the water evaporates. The minerals generally consist of hydrated peroxides of iron,
and sometimes of aluminium, and very occasionally of manganese. The precipitation of these
insoluble hydroxides gives rise to an impermeable lateritic soil. When this point is reached,
the formation of laterite ceases as no further leaching can occur. As a consequence, lateritic
deposits are usually less than 7 m thick.
Plants and animals play an important role in the breakdown and decay of rocks, indeed their part
in soil formation is of major significance. Tree roots penetrate cracks in rocks and gradually
83
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
wedge the sides apart, whereas the adventitious root system of grasses breaks down small
rock fragments to particles of soil size. Burrowing rodents also bring about mechanical disin-
tegration of rocks. The action of bacteria and fungi is largely responsible for the decay of
dead organic matter. Other bacteria are responsible, for example, for the reduction of iron or
sulphur compounds.
Slaking and Swelling of Mudrocks
Mudrocks are more susceptible to weathering and breakdown than many other rock types.
The breakdown of mudrocks starts with exposure, which leads to the opening and devel-
opment of fissures as residual stress is dissipated, and to an increase in moisture content
and softening. The two principal controls on the breakdown of mudrocks are slaking and
the expansion of mixed-layer clay minerals. The lithological factors that govern the durabil-
ity of mudrocks include the degree of induration, the degree of fracturing, the grain size
distribution and the mineralogical composition, especially the nature of the clay mineral
fraction.
Slaking refers to the breakdown of rocks, especially mudrocks, by alternate wetting and
drying. If mudrock is allowed to dry out, air is drawn into the outer pores, and high suction
pressures develop. When the mudrock is saturated next, the entrapped air is pressurized as
water is drawn into the rock by capillary action. This slaking process causes the internal
arrangement of grains to be stressed. Given enough cycles of wetting and drying, breakdown
can occur as a result of air breakage, the process ultimately reducing the mudrock involved
to tabular-shaped, gravel-size particles. The slake durability test estimates the resistance to
wetting and drying of a rock sample, particularly mudstones and rocks that exhibit a certain
degree of alteration. In this test, the sample, which consists of ten pieces of rock, each weigh-
ing about 40 g, is placed in a test drum, oven dried and then weighed. After this, the drum,
with sample, is half immersed in a tank of water and attached to a rotor arm that rotates the
drum for a period of 10 min at 20 rev/min (Fig. 3.4). The cylindrical periphery of the drum is
formed of a 2-mm sieve mesh so that broken-down material can be lost whilst the test is in
progress. After slaking, the drum and the material retained are dried and weighed. The slake
durability index is obtained by dividing the weight of the sample retained by its original weight
and expressing the answer as a percentage. The following scale is used:
Very low Under 25%
Low 25 to 50%
Medium 50 to 75%
High 75 to 90%
Very high 90 to 95%
Extremely high Over 95%
84
Chapter 3
Figure 3.4
The slake-durability apparatus.
Intraparticle swelling (i.e. swelling due to the take up of water – not only between particles of
clay minerals but also within them – into the weakly bonded layers between molecular units)
of clay minerals on saturation can cause mudrocks to break down where the proportion of
such minerals constitutes more than 50% of the rock. The expansive clay minerals such as
montmorillonite can expand many times their original volume.
Failure of consolidated and poorly cemented rocks occurs during saturation when the
swelling pressure or internal saturation swelling stress, s’ developed by capillary suction
s
pressures exceeds their tensile strength. An estimate of s can be obtained from the modu-
s
lus of deformation, E:
E= s e/ (3.1)
S D
where e is the free-swelling coefficient. The latter is determined by a sensitive dial gauge that
D
records the amount of swelling of an oven-dried core specimen per unit height, along the
vertical axis during saturation in water for 12 h, e being obtained as follows:
D
Changeinlengthafterswelling
e = (3.2)
D Initiallength
85
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.5
Geodurability classification chart for intact rock. Note: (i) e is determined from oven-dried (105∞C) to 24-h-saturation condi-
D
tion. (ii) e is plotted as the range and mean of the test results. (iii) strength ratings are according to Bieniawski (1974)
D
(afterOlivier, 1979). With kind permission of Elsevier.
Olivier (1979) proposed the geodurability classification, which is based on the free-swelling
coefficient and uniaxial compressive strength (Fig. 3.5). This classification was developed to
assess the durability of mudrocks.
Engineering Classification of Weathering
The early stages of weathering are usually represented by discoloration of the rock material,
which changes from slightly to highly discoloured as the degree of weathering increases.
86
Chapter 3
Because weathering brings about changes in engineering properties, in particular it com-
monly leads to an increase in porosity with a corresponding reduction in density and strength,
these changes being reflected in the amount of discoloration. As weathering proceeds, the
rock material becomes increasingly decomposed and/or disintegrated until a soil is ultimately
formed. Hence, various stages in the reduction process of a rock to a soil can be recognized.
Numerous attempts have been made to devise engineering classifications of weathered rock
and rock masses. Classification schemes have involved quantification of the amount of min-
eralogical alteration and structural defects in samples with the aid of the petrological micro-
scope. Others have resorted to some combination of simple index tests to provide a
quantifiable grade of weathering. Some of the earliest methods of assessing the degree of
weathering were based on a description of the character of the rock mass concerned as seen
in the field. Such descriptions recognized different grades of weathering and attempted to
relate them to engineering performance.
As mineral composition and texture influence the physical properties of a rock, petrographic
techniques can be used to evaluate successive stages in mineralogical and textural changes
brought about by weathering. Accordingly, Irfan and Dearman (1978) developed a quantitative
method of assessing the grade of weathering of granite in termsof its megascopic and micro-
scopic petrography. The megascopic factors included an evaluation of the amount of discol-
oration, decomposition and disintegration shown by the rock. The microscopic analysis involved
assessment of mineral composition and degree of alteration by modal analysis and microfrac-
ture analysis. Various chemical changes in rock also have been used to assess the grade of
weathering (Kim and Park, 2003). Similarly, physical properties such as bulk density and index
tests such as thequick absorption test have been used to distinguish different grades of weath-
ering. A further example of the use of physical tests for the recognition of weathering grades
has been provided by Iliev (1967), who developed a coefficient of weathering, K, for granitic
rock, based upon the ultrasonic velocities of the rock material according to the expression:
K= (V - V )/V (3.3)
u w u
where V and V are the ultrasonic velocities of the fresh and weathered rocks, respectively
u w
(Table 3.1).
Assessment of the grade of weathering based on a simple description of the geological
character of the rock concerned as seen in the field was initially developed by Moye (1955),
who proposed a grading system for the degree of weathering found in granite at the Snowy
Mountains scheme in Australia. Similar classifications were advanced subsequently that were
directed primarily towards the degree of weathering in granitic rocks. Others, working on dif-
ferent rock types, have proposed modified classifications of weathering grade. For example,
87
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 3.1. Ultrasonic velocity and grade of weathering
Grade of weathering Ultrasonic velocity (m s- 1) Coefficient of weathering
Fresh Over 5000 0
Slightly weathered 4000–5000 0–0.2
Moderately weathered 3000–4000 0.2–0.4
Strong weathered 2000–3000 0.4–0.6
Very strongly weathered Under 2000 0.6–1.0
classifications of weathered chalk and weathered mudstone (marl) have been developed by
Ward et al. (1968) and Chandler (1969), respectively. Usually, the grades lie one above the
other in a weathered profile developed from a single rock type, the highest grade being at the
surface. But this is not necessarily the case in complex geological conditions. Even so, the con-
cept of grade of weathering can still be applied. Such a classification can be used to produce
maps showing the distribution of the grade of weathering at particular engineering sites.
Anon (1995) concluded that the most effective schemes for the classification of weathered
rock have been those involving the description of the grade of weathering of intact rock or of
zones of mass weathering. As far as this report was concerned, it considered that five
approaches were required in order to cover different situations and scales. These are sum-
marized in Figure 3.6. The first approach covers the general description of weathering fea-
tures in rock and forms part of a full description. This description does not involve formal
classification but could provide enough information that could be used subsequently for a par-
ticular classification purpose. Approach 2 classifies the gradation of weathering of intact rock
and is based primarily on strength as determined by simple field tests. Approach 3 is used
for rock masses in which the weathering profiles consist of a mixture of relatively strong and
weak material. Such a classification can be used to distinguish relatively large zones of dif-
ferent engineering characteristics. The fourth approach was developed for those rock masses
in which the scale and heterogeneity of weathering is such that a simple classification scale
that incorporates both intact material and rock mass characteristics is appropriate. It was sug-
gested that this approach is likely to be applicable to weaker sedimentary rocks, especially
mudrocks. The last approach is for those rock types that weather in a particular way, such as
carbonate rocks and some evaporitic deposits.
Movement of Slopes
Soil Creep and Valley Bulging
Creep refers to the slow downslope movement of superficial rock or soil debris, which usu-
ally is imperceptible except by observations of long duration. It is a more or less continuous
88
Chapter 3
Figure 3.6
Approaches to weathering description and classification (after Anon, 1995). With kind permission of the Geological Society.
89
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
process that is distinctly a surface phenomenon and occurs on slopes with gradients some-
what in excess of the angle of repose of the material involved. Similarly to landslip, the prin-
cipal cause of creep is gravity, although it may be influenced by seasonal changes in
temperature, and by swelling and shrinkage in surface rocks. Evidence of soil creep may be
found on many soil-covered slopes. For example, evidence of soil creep occurs as small
terracettes, downslope tilting of poles, the curving downslope of trees and soil accumulation
on the uphill sides of walls.
Solifluction is a form of creep that occurs in cold climates or high altitudes where masses of
saturated rock waste move downslope. Generally, the bulk of the moving mass consists of
fine debris but blocks of appreciable size also may be moved. Saturation is brought about by
rain or melting snow. Moreover, in periglacial regions, water commonly cannot drain into the
ground since it is frozen permanently. Solifluction differs from mudflow in that it moves much
more slowly, the movement is continuous and it occurs over the whole slope.
Valley bulges consist of folds formed by mass movement of argillaceous material in valley bot-
toms, the argillaceous material in the sides of the valley being overlain by thick competent rocks
(Fig. 3.7). The amplitude of the fold can reach 30 m in those instances where a single anticline
occurs along the line of the valley. Alternatively, the valley floor may be bordered by a pair of
reverse faults or a belt of small-scale folding. These features have been explained as stress relief
phenomena, that is, as stream erosion proceeded in the valley, the excess loading on the sides
caused the argillaceous material to be squeezed towards the area of minimum loading. This
caused the rocks in the valley to bulge upwards. However, other factors also may be involved in
the development of valley bulging, such as high piezometric pressures, swelling clays or shales
and rebound adjustments of the stress field due to valley loading and excavation by ice.
The valleyward movement of argillaceous material results in cambering of the overlying com-
petent strata, blocks of which may become detached and move down the valley side.
Fracturing of cambered strata produces deep debris-filled cracks or “gulls” that run parallel to
the trend of the valley. Some gulls may be several metres wide.
Landslides
Landsliding is one of the most effective and widespread mechanisms by which landscape is
developed. It is of great interest to the engineer since an understanding of the causes of land-
slides should help provide answers relating to the control of slopes, either natural or man-
made. An engineer faced with a landslide is interested primarily in curing the harmful effects
of the slide. In many instances, the principal cause cannot be removed so that it may be more
economical to alleviate the effects continually. Indeed, in most landslides, a number of
causes contribute towards movement and any attempt to decide which one finally produced
90
Chapter 3
Figure 3.7
Valley bulging in interbedded shales and thin sandstones of Namurian age revealed during the excavation for the dam for
Howden Reservoir in 1933, South Yorkshire, England.
the failure is not only difficult but pointless. Often, the final factor is nothing more than a trig-
ger mechanism that set in motion a mass that was already on the verge of failure.
Landslides represent the rapid downward and outward movement of slope-forming materials,
the movement taking place by falling, sliding or flowing, or by some combination of
these factors (Griffiths, 2005). This movement generally involves the development of a slip
surface between the separating and remaining masses. However, rockfalls, topples and
debris flows involve little or no true sliding on a slip surface. The majority of stresses found
in most slopes are the gravitational stress from the weight of the material plus the residual
stress.
Landslides occur because the forces creating movement, the disturbing forces, M , exceed
D
those resisting them, the resisting forces, M , that is, the shear strength of the material
R
concerned. In general terms, the stability of a slope may be defined by a factor of safety,
F,where:
F= M /M (3.4)
R D
91
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
If the factor of safety exceeds one, then the slope is stable, whereas if it is less than one, the
slope is unstable.
The common force tending to generate movements on slopes is gravity. Over and above this,
a number of causes of landslides can be recognized. These were grouped into two categories
by Terzaghi (1950a), namely, external causes and internal causes. The former include those
mechanisms outside the mass involved, which are responsible for overcoming its internal
shear strength, thereby causing it to fail. Internal mechanisms are those within the mass that
bring about a reduction of its shear strength to a point below the external forces imposed on
the mass by its environment, thereby inducing failure.
An increase in the weight of slope material means that shearing stresses are increased,
leading to a decrease in the stability of a slope, which may ultimately give rise to a slide. This
can be brought about by natural or artificial (man-made) activity. For instance, removal of
support from the toe of a slope, either by erosion or excavation, is a frequent cause of slides,
as is overloading the top of a slope. Such slides are external slides in that an external
factor causes failure. Other external mechanisms include earthquakes or other shocks
and vibrations. Keefer (1984) suggested that an earthquake with a Richter magnitude of 4
probably would not generate landslides, whereas a magnitude of 9.2 would cause land-
slidesto take place over an area as large as 500,000 km2. He further suggested that
rockfalls, rock slides, soil falls and soil slides are triggered by the weaker seismic tremors,
whereas deep-seated slides and earthflows are generally the result of stronger earthquakes.
Materials that are particularly susceptible to earthquake motions include loess, volcanic ash
on steep slopes, saturated sands of low density, quickclays and loose boulders on slopes.
The most severe losses of life have generally been caused by earthquake-induced land-
slides, for example, the one that occurred in 1920 in Kansu Province, China, killed around
200,000 people.
In many parts of the world, marine erosion on many coastlines was halted by the glacio-
eustatic lowering of sea level during Pleistocene times and recommenced on subsequent
recovery. For example, landslides around the English coast were generally reactivated by
rising sea levels some 4,000 to 8,000 years BP. Hutchinson (1992) stated that once the sea
level became reasonably constant, erosion continued at a steady pace, giving rise to coastal
landslides. A cyclic situation then develops, in which landslide material is removed by the sea
and so the cliffs are steepened, leading to further landsliding. Hence, extended periods of
slow movement are succeeded by sudden first-time failures. Previously, Hutchinson (1973)
had noted that the cliffs developed in London Clay at Warren Point, Isle of Sheppey, have
a landslip cycle of approximately 40 years. By contrast, the coastal landslide cycle for
the harder Cretaceous rocks forming the Undercliff, Isle of Wight, is about 6,000 years
(Hutchinson et al., 1991).
92
Chapter 3
Internal slides are usually caused by an increase of pore water pressures within the slope
material, which causes a reduction in the effective shear strength. Indeed, it is generally
agreed that in most landslides, groundwater constitutes the most important single contributory
cause. Hence, landslides can be triggered by rainfall if some threshold intensity is exceeded
so that pore water pressures are increased by a required amount (Olivier et al., 1994). Rises
in the levels of water tables because of short-duration intense rainfall or prolonged rainfall of
lower intensity are a major cause of landslides (Bell, 1994a). An increase in moisture content
also means an increase in the weight of the slope material or its bulk density, which can induce
slope failure. Significant volume changes may occur in some materials, notably clays, on wet-
ting and drying out. Not only does this weaken the clay by developing desiccation cracks within
it, but the enclosing strata also may be adversely affected. Seepage forces within granular
soilcan produce a reduction in strength by reducing the number of contacts between grains.
Weathering can effect a reduction in the strength of slope material, leading to sliding. The
necessary breakdown of equilibrium to initiate sliding may take decades. In relatively imper-
meable cohesive soils, the swelling process is probably the most important factor leading to
a loss of strength and, therefore, to delayed failure (Meisina, 2004).
A slope in dry coarse soils should be stable, provided its inclination is less than the angle of
repose. Slope failure tends to be caused by the influence of water. For instance, seepage of
groundwater through a deposit of sand in which slopes exist can cause them to fail. Failure
on a slope composed of granular soil involves the translational movement of a shallow sur-
face layer. The slip is often appreciably longer than it is in depth. This is because the strength
of granular soils increases rapidly with depth. If, as is generally the case, there is a reduction
in the density of the granular soil along the slip surface, the peak strength is reduced ulti-
mately to the residual strength. The soil will continue shearing without further change in
volume once it has reached its residual strength. Although shallow slips are common, deep-
seated shear slides can occur in granular soils.
In fine soils, slope and height are interdependent, and can be determined when the shear
characteristics of the material are known. Because of their moisture-retaining capacity and
low permeability, pore water pressures are developed in cohesive soils. These pore water
pressures reduce the strength of the soil. Thus, in order to derive the strength of an element
of the failure surface within a slope in cohesive soil, the pore water pressure at that point
needs to be determined to obtain the total and effective stresses. This effective stress is then
used as the normal stress in a shear box or triaxial test to assess the shear strength of the
clay concerned. Skempton (1964) showed that on a stable slope in clay, the resistance
offered along a slip surface, that is, its shear strength, s, is given by
s= c1+(s- u) tan f1 (3.5)
93
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
where c1 = cohesion intercept, f1 = angle of shearing resistance (these are average values
around the slip surface and are expressed in terms of effective stress), s= total overburden
pressure and u= pore water pressure. In a stable slope, only part of the total available shear
resistance along a potential slip surface is mobilized to balance the total shear force, t , hence:
S t= S c1/F+S (s- u) tan f1/F (3.6)
where F is the factor of safety. If the total shear force equals the total shear strength, then
a slip is likely to occur (i.e. F= 1.0).
Clay soils, especially in short-term conditions, may exhibit relatively uniform strength with
increasing depth. As a result, slope failures, particularly short-term failures, may be compar-
atively deep-seated, with roughly circular slip surfaces. This type of failure is typical of rela-
tively small slopes. Landslides on larger slopes are often noncircular failure surfaces
following bedding planes or other weak horizons.
The factors that determine the degree of stability of steep slopes in hard unweathered crys-
talline rocks (defined as rocks with unconfined strengths of 35 MPa and over) have been
examined by Terzaghi (1962). Terzaghi contended that landsliding in such rocks is largely
dependent on the incidence, orientation and nature of the discontinuities present. The value
of the angle of shearing resistance required for a stability analysis, f, depends on the type
and degree of interlock between the blocks on either side of the surface of sliding. Terzaghi
concluded that the critical slope angles for slopes underlain by strong massive rocks with a
random joint pattern is about 70∞, provided the walls of the joints are not acted on by seep-
age pressures.
In a bedded and jointed rock mass, if the bedding planes are inclined, the critical slope angle
depends on their orientation in relation to the slope and the orientation of the joints (Hoek and
Bray, 1981). The relation between the angle of shearing resistance, f, along a discontinuity,
at which sliding will occur under gravity, and the inclination of the discontinuity, a, is impor-
tant. If a<f, the slope is stable at any angle, whereas if f<a, then gravity will induce move-
ment along the discontinuity surface, and the slope cannot exceed the critical angle, which
has a maximum value equal to the inclination of the discontinuities. It must be borne in mind,
however, that rock masses are generally interrupted by more than one set of discontinuities.
Classification of Landslides
Varnes (1978) classified landslides according to the type of materials involved on the one
hand and the type of movement undergone on the other (Fig. 3.8). The materials concerned
were grouped as rocks and soils. The types of movement were grouped into falls, slides and
94
Chapter 3
Figure 3.8
Aclassification of landslides (after Varnes, 1978). With kind permission of the National Academy of Science.
flows; one can, of course, merge into another. Complex slope movements are those in which
there is a combination of two or more principal types of movement. Multiple movements are
those in which repeated failures of the same type occur in succession.
Falls are very common (Fig. 3.9). The moving mass in a fall travels mostly through the air by
free fall, saltation or rolling, with little or no interaction between the moving fragments.
Movements are very rapid and may not be preceded by minor movements. In rockfalls, the
fragments are of various sizes and are generally broken in the fall. They accumulate at the
bottom of a slope as scree. If rockfall is active or very recent, then the slope from which it was
derived is scarped. Freeze–thaw action is one of the major causes of rockfall.
Toppling failure of individual blocks is governed by joint spacing and orientation, and is a special
type of rockfall that can involve considerable volumes of rock. The condition for toppling is
defined by the position of the weight vector in relation to the base of the block involved. If the
weight vector, which passes through the centre of gravity of the block, falls outside the base of
the block, toppling will occur. Put another way, the condition for stability is that the resultant
force must be within the central two thirds of the base of the block. Hydrostatic forces acting
95
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.9
Rockfall on the slopes of Table Mountain, Cape Town, South Africa.
at the rear of near-vertical joints greatly affect the direction of the resultant force. The danger
of a slope toppling increases with increasing discontinuity angle, and steep slopes in vertically
jointed rocks frequently exhibit signs of toppling failure.
In true slides, the movement results from shear failure along one or several surfaces, such
surfaces offering the least resistance to movement. The mass involved may or may not expe-
rience considerable deformation. One of the most common types of slide occurs in clay soils
where the slip surface is approximately spoon-shaped. Such slides are referred to as rota-
tional slides. They are commonly deep-seated (0.15 depth/length < 0.33). Although the slip
surface is concave upwards, it seldom approximates to a circular arc of uniform curvature.
For instance, if the shear strength of the soil is less in the horizontal than vertical direction,
the arc may flatten out; if the soil conditions are reversed, then the converse may apply. What
is more, the shape of the slip surface is influenced by the discontinuity pattern of the materials
involved (Bell and Maud, 1996).
96
Chapter 3
Figure 3.10
Block diagram illustrating the principal features of a rotational slide.
Rotational slides usually develop from tension scars in the upper part of a slope, the move-
ment being more or less rotational about an axis located above the slope (Fig. 3.10). The ten-
sion cracks at the head of a rotational slide are generally concentric and parallel to the main
scar. When the scar at the head of a rotational slide is almost vertical and unsupported, then
further failure will usually occur, it is just a matter of time. As a consequence, successive rota-
tional slides occur until the slope is stabilized. These are retrogressive slides, and they
develop in a headward direction. All multiple retrogressive slides have a common basal shear
surface in which the individual planes of failure are combined.
Translational slides occur in inclined stratified deposits, the movement occurring along a
planar surface, frequently a bedding plane (Fig. 3.11). The mass involved in the movement
becomes dislodged because the force of gravity overcomes the frictional resistance along the
potential slip surface, the mass having been detached from the parent rock by a prominent
discontinuity such as a major joint. Slab slides, in which the slip surface is roughly parallel to
the ground surface, are a common type of translational slide. Such a slide may progress almost
indefinitely if the slip surface is inclined sufficiently, and the resistance along it is less than
the driving force, whereas rotational sliding usually brings equilibrium to an unstable mass.
Slab slides can occur on gentler surfaces than rotational slides and may be more extensive.
Rock slides and debris slides are usually the result of a gradual weakening of the bonds
within a rock mass and are generally translational in character (Fig. 3.12). Most rock slides are
controlled by the discontinuity patterns within the parent rock. Water is seldom an important
97
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.11
Atranslational slide. Zis the depth of the plane of failure below the surface; Z is the depth of the plane of failure below
w
the water table; ais the angle of inclination of the plane of failure and the surface. In a translational slide, it is assumed that the
potential plane of failure lies near to and parallel to the surface. The water table is also inclined parallel to the surface. If the
water table creates a hydrostatic component of pressure on the slip surface with flow out of the slope, then the factor of safety,
F, is:F =c1+(gZcos2a- gZ) Ztancj 1/gZ sinacosa, where gis the unit weight, g is the unit weight of water and c1and j1
w w w
arethe effective cohesion and angle of shearing resistance, respectively.
Figure 3.12
Debris slide along Arthur’s Pass, South Island, New Zealand.
98
Chapter 3
direct factor in causing rock slides, although it may weaken bonding along joints and bedding
planes. Freeze–thaw action, however, is an important cause. Rock slides commonly occur on
steep slopes, and most of them are of single rather than multiple occurrence. They are com-
posed of rock boulders. Individual fragments may be very large and may move great distances
from their source. Debris slides are usually restricted to the weathered zone or to surficial
talus. With increasing water content, debris slides grade into mudflows. These slides are
often limited by the contact between loose material and the underlying firm bedrock.
In a flow, the movement resembles that of a viscous fluid. Slip surfaces are usually not visible
or are short lived, and the boundary between the flow and the material over which it moves
may be sharp or may be represented by a zone of plastic flow. Some content of water is nec-
essary for most types of flow movement, but dry flows can occur. Dry flows, which consist
predominantly of rock fragments, are referred to as rock fragment flows or rock avalanches
and generally result from a rock slide or rockfall turning into a flow. Generally, dry flows are
very rapid and short lived, and frequently are composed mainly of silt or sand. As would be
expected, they are of frequent occurrence in rugged mountainous regions where they usually
involve the movement of many millions of tonnes of material. Wet flows occur when fine-
grained soils, with or without coarse debris, become mobilized by an excess of water. They
may be of great length.
Progressive failure is rapid in debris avalanches, and the whole mass, either because it is
quite wet or is on a steep slope, moves downwards, often along a stream channel, and
advances well beyond the foot of a slope. Debris avalanches are generally long and narrow,
and frequently leave V-shaped scars tapering headwards. These gullies often become the
sites of further movement.
Debris flows are distinguished from mudflows on the basis of particle size, the former con-
taining a high percentage of coarse fragments, whereas the latter consist of at least 50%
sand-size particles or less. Almost invariably, debris flows follow unusually intense rainfall or
sudden thaw of frozen ground. These flows are of high density, perhaps 60 to 70% solids by
weight, and are capable of carrying large boulders. Similar to debris avalanches, they com-
monly cut V-shaped channels, at the sides of which coarser material may accumulate as the
more fluid central area moves down-channel. Both debris flows and mudflows may move
over many kilometres.
Mudflows may develop when torrential rain or a rapidly moving stream of storm water mixes
with a sufficient quantity of debris to form a pasty mass (Fig. 3.13). Because mudflows fre-
quently occur along the same courses, they should be kept under observation when signifi-
cant damage is likely to result. Mudflows frequently move at rates ranging between 10 and
100 m min- 1 and can travel over slopes inclined at 1∞or less. Indeed, they usually develop
99
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.13
Mudflow in colluvial ground, Durban, South Africa.
on slopes with shallow inclinations, that is, between 5 and 15∞. An earthflow involves mostly
cohesive or fine-grained material that may move slowly or rapidly. The speed of movement is,
to some extent, dependent on water content in that the higher the content, the faster the move-
ment.Slowly moving earthflows may continue to move for several years. These flows gener-
ally develop as a result of a build-up of pore water pressure, so that part of the weight of the
material is supported by interstitial water with a consequent decrease in shearing resistance.
A bulging frontal lobe is formed if the material is saturated, and this may split into a number of
tongues that advance with a steady rolling motion. Earthflows frequently form the spreading
toes of rotational slides due to the material being softened by the ingress of water.
Fluvial Processes
The Development of Drainage Systems
As far as the development of a drainage system is concerned, it is assumed that the initial
drainage pattern develops on a new surface and consists of a series of sub-parallel rills flow-
ing down the steepest slopes. The drainage pattern then becomes integrated by micropiracy
(the beheading of the drainage system of a small rill by that of a larger one) and cross-grading.
Micropiracy occurs when the ridges that separate the initial rills are overtopped and broken
down. When the divides are overtopped, the water tends to move towards those rills
100
Chapter 3
Figure 3.14
(a) Trellised drainage pattern of consequent streams, C, and their subsequents, S, showing the erosion of a gentle dipping
series of hard and soft beds into escarpments. (b) Later development illustrating river capture or micropiracy by the headward
growth of the more vigorous subsequent streams; e = elbow of capture, W = wind gap, M = misfit stream, o = obsequent stream.
at a slightly lower elevation and, in the process, the divides are eroded. Eventually, water
drains from rills of higher elevation into adjacent ones of lower elevation (Fig. 3.14). The flow
towards the master rill steadily increases, and its development across the main gradient is
termed cross-grading. The tributaries that flow into the master stream are subsequently
subjected to cross-grading and, thus the river system is gradually developed.
The texture of the drainage system is influenced by rock type and structure, the nature of the
vegetation cover and the type of climate. The drainage density affords a measure of compar-
ison between the development of one drainage system and another. It is calculated by divid-
ing the total length of a stream by the area it drains, and is generally expressed in kilometres
per square kilometre.
Streams can be classified into orders. First-order streams are unbranched, and when two
such streams become confluent, they form a second-order stream. It is only when streams of
the same order meet that they produce one of the higher rank, for example, a second-order
stream flowing into a third-order stream does not alter its rank. The frequency with which
streams of a certain order flow into those of the next order above them is referred to as the
bifurcation ratio. The bifurcation ratio for any consecutive pair of orders is obtained by divid-
ing the total number of streams of the lower order by the total number in the next higher order.
Similarly, the stream length ratio is found by dividing the total length of streams of the lower
order by the total length of those in the next higher order. Values of stream length ratio
depend mainly on drainage density and stream entrance angles, and increase somewhat
101
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
with increasing order. A river system also is assigned an order, which is defined numerically
by the highest stream order it contains.
In the early stages of development, in particular, rivers tend to accommodate themselves to
the local geology. For instance, tributaries may develop along fault zones. What is more, rock
type has a strong influence on the drainage texture or channel spacing. In other words, a
low drainage density tends to form on resistant or permeable rocks, whereas weak highly
erodible rocks are characterized by a high drainage density.
The initial dominant action of master streams is vertical down-cutting that is accomplished by
the formation of potholes, which ultimately coalesce, and by the abrasive action of the load.
Hence, in the early stages of river development, the cross profile of the valley is sharply
V-shaped. As time passes, valley widening due to soil creep, slippage, rain-wash and gullying
becomes progressively more important and, eventually, lateral corrasion replaces vertical
erosion as the dominant process. A river possesses few tributaries in the early stages, but
their numbers increase as the valley widens, thus affording a growing increment of rock
waste to the master stream, thereby enhancing its corrasive power.
During valley widening, the stream erodes the valley sides by causing undermining and
slumping to occur on the outer concave curves of meanders where steep cliffs or bluffs
are formed. These are most marked on the upstream side of each spur. Deposition usually
takes place on the convex side of a meander. Meanders migrate both laterally and down-
stream, and their amplitude is increased progressively. In this manner, spurs are eroded
continually, first becoming more asymmetrical until they are eventually truncated (Fig. 3.15).
The slow deposition that occurs on the convex side of a meander, as lateral migration
proceeds, produces a gently sloping area of alluvial ground called the flood plain. The flood
plain gradually grows wider as the river bluffs recede, until it is as broad as the amplitude of
the meanders. From now onwards, the continual migration of meanders slowly reduces the
valley floor to an almost flat plain that slopes gently downstream and is bounded by shallow
valley sides.
Figure 3.15
Widening of valley floor by lateral corrosion.
102
Chapter 3
Throughout its length, a river channel has to adjust to several factors that change independ-
ently of the channel itself. These include the different rock types and structures across which
it flows. The tributaries and inflow of water from underground sources affect the long profile
of a river. Other factors that bring about adjustment of a river channel are flow resistance,
which is a function of particle size, and the shape of transistory deposits such as bars, the
method of load transport and the channel pattern including meanders and islands. Lastly, the
river channel must also adjust itself to the river slope, width, depth and velocity.
As the longitudinal profile or thalweg of a river is developed, the differences between
the upper, middle and lower sections of its course become more clearly defined until three
distinctive tracts are observed. These are the upper or torrent, the middle or valley, and the
lower or plain stages. The torrent stage includes the headstreams of a river where small fast-
flowing streams are engaged principally in active downward and headward erosion. They
possess steep-sided cross profiles and irregular thalwegs. The initial longitudinal profile of a
river reflects the irregularities that occur in its path. For instance, it may exhibit waterfalls or
rapids where it flows across resistant rocks. However, such features are transient in the life
of a river. In the valley tract, the predominant activity is lateral corrasion. The shape of the
valley sides depend on the nature of the rocks being excavated, the type of climate, the rate
of rock wastage and meander development. Some reaches in the valley tract may approxi-
mate to grade, and the meanders may have developed alluvial flats there, while other
stretches may be steep-sided with irregular longitudinal profiles. The plain tract is formed by
the migration of meanders, and deposition is the principal river activity.
Meanders, although not confined to, are characteristic of flood plains. The consolidated
veneer of alluvium, spread over a flood plain, offers little resistance to continual meander
development. Hence, the loops become more and more accentuated. As time proceeds, the
swelling loops approach one another. During flood, the river may cut through the neck, sep-
arating two adjacent loops, thereby straightening its course. As it is much easier for the river
to flow through this new course, the meander loop is silted off and abandoned as an oxbow
lake (Fig. 3.16).
Figure 3.16
Formation of an oxbow lake.
103
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Meander lengths vary from 7 to 10 times the width of the channel, whereas cross-overs occur
at about every 5 to 7 channel widths. The amplitude of a meander bears little relation to its
length but is largely determined by the erosion characteristics of the river bed and local fac-
tors. For instance, in uniform material, the amplitude of meanders does not increase progres-
sively nor do meanders form oxbow lakes during the downstream migration of bends. Higher
sinuosity is associated with small width relative to depth and a larger percentage of silt and
clay in the river banks, which affords greater cohesiveness. Relatively sinuous channels with
a low width–depth ratio are developed by rivers transporting large quantities of suspended
sediment. By contrast, the channel tends to be wide, shallow and less sinuous when the
amount of bedload discharge is high.
A river is described as being braided if it splits into a number of separate channels or
anabranches to adjust to a broad valley. The areas between the anabranches are occupied
by islands built of gravel and sand. For the islands to remain stable, the river banks must be
more erodible so that they give way rather than the islands. Braided channels occur on
steeper slopes than do meanders.
Climatic changes and earth movements alter the base level to which a river grades. When a
land surface is elevated, the down-cutting activity of rivers flowing over it is accelerated. The
rivers begin to regrade their courses from their base level and, as time proceeds, their newly
graded profiles are extended upstream until they are fully adjusted to the new conditions.
Until this time, the old longitudinal profile intersects with the new to form a knick point. The
upstream migration of knick points tends to be retarded by outcrops of resistant rock; conse-
quently, after an interval of time they are usually located at hard rock exposures. The accel-
eration of down-cutting consequent on uplift frequently produces a new valley within the old,
the new valley extending upstream to the knick point.
River terraces are also developed by rejuvenation. In the lower course of a river, uplift leads
to the river cutting into its alluvial plain. The lateral and downstream migration of meanders
means that a new flood plain is formed but very often paired alluvial terraces, representing
the remnants of the former flood plain, are left at its sides (Fig. 3.17).
Incised meanders are also associated with rejuvenation and are often found together with river
terraces. When uplift occurs, the down-cutting action of meanders is accelerated, and they carve
themselves into the terrain over which they flow. The landforms that are then produced depend
on the character of the terrain, and the relative rates of down-cutting and meander migration.
If vertical erosion is rapid, meander shift has little opportunity to develop and, consequently, the
loops are not greatly enlarged. The resulting incised meanders are described as entrenched.
However, when time is afforded for meander migration, they incise themselves by oblique
erosion and the loops are enlarged, then they are referred to as ingrown meanders.
104
Chapter 3
Figure 3.17
(a) Paired river terraces due to rejuvenation, note valley in valley and knick points. (b) Section across London, England, to show
the paired terraces and one of the buried valleys of the River Thames.
When incision occurs in the alluvium of a river plain, the meanders migrate back and forth
across the floor. On each successive occasion that a meander swings back to the same side,
it does so at a lower level. As a consequence, small remnant terraces may be left above the
newly formed plain. These terraces are not paired across the valley, and their position and
preservation depends on the swing of meanders over the valley. If down-cutting is very slow,
then erosion terraces are unlikely to be preserved.
Conversely, when sea level changes, rivers again have to regrade their courses to the new
base level. For instance, during glacial times, the sea level was at a much lower level, and
rivers carved out valleys accordingly. As the last glaciation retreated, the sea level rose and
the rivers had to adjust to these changing conditions. This frequently meant that their valleys
were filled with sediments. Hence, buried channels are associated with the lowland sections
of many rivers.
The Work of Rivers
The work done by a stream is a function of the energy it possesses. Stream energy is lost as
a result of friction from turbulent mixing, and frictional losses are dependent on channel
roughness and shape. Total energy is influenced mostly by velocity, which is a function of the
stream gradient, volume and viscosity of water in flow and the characteristics of the channel
105
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
cross section and bed. This relationship has been embodied in the Chezy formula, which
expresses velocity as a function of hydraulic radius, R, and slope, S:
v =C (RS) (3.7)
where v is mean velocity and C is a constant that depends on gravity and varies with the
characteristics of the channel. Numerous attempts have been made to find a generally
acceptable expression for C.
The Manning formula represents an attempt to refine the Chezy equation in terms of the
constant C:
v=1.49
R2/3 S1/2
(3.8)
n
where the terms are the same as in the Chezy equation, and nis the roughness factor. The
velocity of flow increases as roughness decreases for a channel of particular gradient and
dimensions. The roughness factor has to be determined empirically and varies not only for
different streams but also for the same stream under different conditions and at different
times. In natural channels, the value of n is 0.01 for smooth beds, about 0.02 for sand and
0.03 for gravel. Anything that affects the roughness of a channel changes n, including the
size and shape of grains on the bed, sinuosity and obstructions in the channel section.
Variation in discharge also affects the roughness factor since depth of water and volume
influence the roughness.
The ratio between the cross-sectional area of a river channel and the length of its wetted
perimeter determines the efficiency of the channel. This ratio is termed the hydraulic radius,
and the higher its value, the more efficient is the river. The most efficient forms of channel
are those with approximately circular or rectangular sections, with widths approaching twice
their depths. On the other hand, the most inefficient channel forms are very broad and shal-
low with wide wetted perimeters.
The quantity of flow can be estimated from measurements of cross-sectional areas and current
speed of a river. Generally, channels become wider relative to their depth and adjusted to larger
flows with increasing distance downstream. Bankfull discharges also increase downstream in
proportion to the square of the width of the channel or of the length of individual meanders, and
in proportion to the 0.75 power of the total drainage area focused at the point in question.
Statistical methods are used to predict river flow and assume that recurrence intervals of
extreme events bear a consistent relationship to their magnitudes. A recurrence interval,
106
Chapter 3
Figure 3.18
Component parts of a hydrograph. When rainfall commences, there is an initial period of interception and infiltration before any
measurable runoff reaches the stream channels. During the period of rainfall, these losses continue in a reduced form so that
the rainfall graph has to be adjusted to show effective rain. When the initial losses are met, surface runoff begins and contin-
ues to a peak value that occurs at time tp, measured from the centre of gravity of the effective rain on the graph. Thereafter,
surface runoff declines along the recession limb until it disappears. Baseflow represents the groundwater contribution along the
banks of the river.
generally of 50 or 100 years, is chosen in accordance with the given hydrological require-
ments. The concept of unit hydrograph postulates that the most important hydrological char-
acteristics of any basin can be seen from the direct run-off hydrograph resulting from 25 mm
of rainfall evenly distributed over 24 h. This is produced by drawing a graph of the total stream
flow at a chosen point as it changes with time after such a storm, from which the normal base-
flow caused by groundwater is subtracted (Fig. 3.18).
There is a highly significant relationship between mean annual flood discharge per unit area
and drainage density. Peak discharge and the lag time of discharge (the time that elapses
between maximum precipitation and maximum run-off) are also influenced by drainage density,
as well as by the shape and slope of the drainage basin. Stream flow is generally most
variable, and flood discharges at a maximum per unit area in small basins. This is because
storms tend to be local in occurrence. A relationship exists between drainage density and
baseflow or groundwater discharge. This is related to the permeability of the rocks present in
107
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.19
Curves for erosion, transportation and deposition of uniform sediment. F = fine; M = medium; C = coarse. Note that sand is the
most easily eroded material.
a drainage basin. In other words, the greater the quantity of water that moves on the surface
of the drainage system, the higher the drainage density, which, in turn, means that the base-
flow is lower. As pointed out previously, in areas of high drainage density, the soils and rocks
are relatively impermeable and water runs off rapidly. The amount of infiltration is reduced
accordingly.
The work undertaken by a river is threefold, it erodes soils and rocks and transports the prod-
ucts thereof, which it eventually deposits (Fig. 3.19). Erosion occurs when the force provided
by the river flow exceeds the resistance of the material over which it runs. The velocity needed
to initiate movement, that is, the erosional velocity, is appreciably higher than that required to
maintain movement. Four types of fluvial erosion have been distinguished, namely, hydraulic
action, attrition, corrasion and corrosion. Hydraulic action is the force of the water itself.
Attrition is the disintegration that occurs when two or more particles that are suspended in
water collide. Corrasion is the abrasive action of the load carried by a river on its channel.
Most of the erosion done by a river is attributable to corrasive action. Hence, a river carrying
coarse, resistant, angular rock debris possesses a greater ability to erode than does one
transporting fine particles in suspension. Corrosion is the solvent action of river water.
108
Chapter 3
In the early stages of river development, erosion tends to be greatest in the lower part of the
drainage basin. However, as the basin develops, the zone of maximum erosion moves
upstream, and it is concentrated along the divides in the later stages. The amount of erosion
accomplished by a river in a given time depends on its volume and velocity of flow; the char-
acter and size of its load; the rock type and geological structure over which it flows; the infil-
tration capacity of the area it drains; the vegetation (which affects soil stability); and the
permeability of the soil. The volume and velocity of a river influence the quantity of energy it
possesses. When flooding occurs, the volume of a river is increased significantly, which leads
to an increase in its velocity and competence. However, much energy is spent in overcom-
ing the friction between the river and its channel so that energy losses increase with any
increase in channel roughness. Obstructions, changing forms on a river bed such as sand-
bars and vegetation, offer added resistance to flow. Bends in a river also increase friction.
Each of these factors causes deflection of the flow that dissipates energy by creating eddies,
secondary circulation and increased shear rate.
The load that a river carries is transported in four different ways. Firstly, there is traction, that is,
rolling of the coarsest fragments along the river bed. Secondly, smaller material, when caught
in turbulent upward-moving eddies, proceeds downstream in a jumping motion referred to as
saltation. Thirdly, fine sand, silt and mud may be transported in suspension. Fourthly, soluble
material is carried in solution.
Sediment yield may be determined by sampling both the suspended load and the bedload.
It can also be derived from the amount of deposition that takes place when a river enters
a relatively still body of water such as a lake or a reservoir.
The competence of a river to transport its load is demonstrated by the largest boulder it is
capable of moving; it varies according to the velocity of a river and its volume, being at a max-
imum during flood. It has been calculated that the competence of a river varies as the sixth
power of its velocity. The capacity of a river refers to the total amount of sediment that it car-
ries. It varies according to the size of the soil and rock material that form the load, and the
velocity of the river. When the load consists of fine particles, the capacity is greater than when
it is comprised of coarse material. Usually, the capacity of a river varies as the third power of
its velocity.
Both the competence and capacity of a river are influenced by changes in the weather, and
the lithology and structure of the rocks over which it flows, as well as by vegetative cover
and land use. Because the discharge of a river varies, all sediments are not transported
continuously, for instance, boulders may be moved only a few metres during a single flood.
Sediments that are deposited over a flood plain may be regarded as being stored there
temporarily.
109
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Deposition occurs where turbulence is at a minimum or where the region of turbulence is near
the surface of a river. For example, lateral accretion occurs, with deposition of a point bar, on
the inside of a meander bend. The settling velocity for small grains in water is roughly pro-
portional to the square of the grain diameter, whereas for larger particles, settling velocity is
proportional to the square root of the grain diameter. An individual point bar grows as a mean-
der migrates downstream, and new ones are formed as a river changes its course during
flood. Indeed, old meander scars are a common feature of flood plains. The combination of
point bar and filled slough or oxbow lake gives rise to ridge and swale topography. The ridges
consist of sandbars, and the swales are sloughs filled with silt and clay.
An alluvial flood plain is the most common depositional feature of a river. The alluvium is
made up of many kinds of deposits, laid down both in the channel and outside it. Vertical
accretion on a flood plain is accomplished by in-channel filling and the growth of overbank
deposits during and immediately after floods. Gravel and coarse sands are moved chiefly
at flood stages and deposited in the deeper parts of a river. As the river overtops its banks,
its ability to transport material is lessened, so that coarser particles are deposited near
the banks to form levees. Levees stand above the general level of the adjoining plain so
that the latter is usually poorly drained and marshy (Fig. 3.20). This is particularly the
case when levees have formed across the confluences of minor tributaries, forcing them
to wander over the flood plain until they find another entrance to the main river. Finer
material is carried farther and laid down as backswamp deposits. At this point, a river
sometimes aggrades its bed, eventually raising it above the level of the surrounding plain.
Consequently, when levees are breached by flood water, hundreds of square kilometres
may be inundated.
Figure 3.20
The main depositional features of a meandering channel.
110
Chapter 3
Karst Topography and Underground Drainage
Karst topography refers to a distinctive terrain that is associated primarily with carbonate rock
masses, which contain physical features that have been formed by dissolution of the rock
material. These features include sinkholes, dry valleys, pavements and subsurface drainage
and associated springs, voids, galleries and caves. Karst terrain, therefore, not only possesses
features peculiar to itself but also unique hydrogeological characteristics. The features vary
enormously in character, shape and size, and so may represent extremely difficult and costly
ground conditions to work in. Although karst is associated primarily with limestone and dolo-
stone rock masses, karstic features are developed in chalk and marble, as well as in evaporitic
rocks, especially gypsum.
Suites of karst landforms in limestone and related carbonate rocks evolve through progressive
denudation of the land surface, while underground denudation is simultaneously enlarging cave
conduits so that ever larger proportions of the drainage can pass underground. Both surface
and underground denudation is largely by dissolution of the carbonate, at rates dependent on
the flow and chemical aggressivity of the water. Both these factors are dependent on climate.
If solution continues, its rate slackens and it eventually ceases when saturation is reached.
Therefore, solution is greatest when the bicarbonate saturation is low. This occurs when water
is circulating so that fresh supplies with low bicarbonate saturation are made available continu-
ally. Water flows are largely a consequence of rainfall input (though they can be increased
locally by supplies of allogenic water draining off adjacent outcrops of non-karstic rocks).
The dissolution of limestone is a very slow process. For instance, Kennard and Knill (1968)
quoted mean rates of surface lowering of limestone areas in the British Isles that ranged from
0.041 to 0.099 mm annually, and Sowers (1996) suggested rates of 0.025 to 0.040 mm a- 1
for the eastern United States. More recently, Trudgill and Viles (1998) quoted calculated ero-
sion rates of calcite of 0.06 to 0.11 mm a- 1 at pH 5.5, and 2.18 to 2.69 mm a- 1 at pH 4.0.
Nevertheless, solution may be accelerated by man-made changes in the groundwater condi-
tions or by a change in the character of the surface water that drains into limestone.
Limestone and dolostone are transected by discontinuities. These normally have been sub-
jected to various degrees of dissolution so that they gape. The progressive opening of discon-
tinuities by dissolution leads to an increase in rock mass permeability. Moreover, dissolution
along discontinuities produces an irregular surface that is characterized by the presence of
clints and grykes (i.e. slabs of limestone separated by furrows) as, for example, may be seen
on limestone pavements. The latter are bare limestone surfaces that are associated with near-
horizontally bedded limestone (Fig. 3.21). Rockhead profiles developed beneath soil profiles
may also be irregular as again discontinuities, notably joints, are subjected to dissolution. In
both cases, this process ultimately leads to the formation of rock pinnacles of various sizes.
111
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.21
Limestone pavement, the Burren, Southern Ireland.
Sinkholes are characteristic features of karst terrain and may develop where solution-
opened joints intersect (Waltham and Fookes, 2003). They may lead to an integrated
system of subterranean galleries and caves. The latter are characteristic of thick massive
limestone or dolostone formations. Sinkholes vary in diameter but usually are a few
metresor tens of metres across and may descend up to 500 m in depth below the surface
(Fig. 3.22).
Caves form in competent limestone or dolostone where there is an adequate through flow
of groundwater, the flow rate and aggressiveness of groundwater being mainly responsible
for the enlargement of caves. They originate along bedding planes and tectonic fractures,
which are enlarged into networks of open fissures, favourable flow paths being enlarged
selectively into caves. It is frequently asserted that the most active dissolution occurs
at and just below the water table (Trudgill and Viles, 1998). Hence, it is here, within the
uppermost part of the phreatic zone, where caves are most likely to be developed. As such,
they are often within 100 m of the ground surface. If the amplitude of fluctuation of the
water table increases or if it suffers a notable decline, this can lead to the enlargement of
caves. Subsequently, caves may be abandoned if their groundwater is captured by pre-
ferred routes or they may be partially or wholly filled with sediment. The size of caves
112
Chapter 3
Figure 3.22
Appearance of a sinkhole, Guilin, China.
ranges up to huge caverns, the largest being found in the humid tropics. As an example,
Swart et al. (2003) reported that the Apocalypse cave system, which occurs in the dolo-
stone of the Wonderfontein Valley, South Africa, has a surveyed length of approximately
13 km and is considered the longest cave system in southern Africa. A cave collapses
when its span exceeds its bridging capacity, which depends primarily on rock mass
strength (which takes character of discontinuities and degree of weathering into account),
and in doing so, the void migrates upward. Nevertheless, most caves in massive strong
limestone/dolostone are stable and are generally located at depths at which stable roof
arches have developed.
Surface streams disappear underground via sinkholes. The larger sinkholes may be con-
nected near the surface by irregular inclined shafts, known as ponors, to integrated under-
ground systems of galleries and caves. Larger surface depressions form when enlarged
sinkholes coalesce to form uvalas. These features may range up to 1 km in diameter. Any
residual masses of limestone that, after a lengthy period of continuous denudation, remain as
isolated hills are known as hums. These are honeycombed with galleries, shafts and caves.
However, the nature of karst landforms is influenced by climate, for example, tower karst is
developed in tropical and semi-tropical regions (Fig. 3.23).
113
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.23
Limestone towers, south of Guilin, China.
Underground systems of drainage in limestone terrains deepen and widen their courses by
mechanical erosion and solution. During flood, water may wear away the roofs as well as the
sides and floors of the galleries and caves through which it flows. In this way, caves are
enlarged and their roofs are gradually thinned until they become unstable. At this point, they
may partially or wholly collapse to form natural arches or gorges, respectively. Nevertheless,
this is not a common occurrence.
Surface drainage is usually sparse in areas of thick limestone. Dry valleys are common,
although they may be occupied by streams during periods of intense rainfall. Underground
streams may appear as vaclusian springs where the water table meets the surface.
Occasionally, streams that rise on impervious strata may traverse a broad limestone outcrop
without disappearing.
Glaciation
A glacier may be defined as a mass of ice that is formed from recrystallized snow and
refrozen melt water, and that moves under the influence of gravity. Glaciers develop above
the snowline, that is, in regions of the world that are cold enough to allow snow to remain on
114
Chapter 3
the surface throughout the year. The snowline varies in altitude from sea level in polar regions
to above 5000 m in equatorial regions. As the area of a glacier that is exposed to wastage is
small compared with its volume, this accounts for the fact that glaciers penetrate into the
warmer zones below the snowline.
Glaciers can be grouped into three types, namely, valley glaciers, piedmont glaciers, and
ice sheets and ice caps. Valley glaciers flow down pre-existing valleys from mountainswhere
snow has collected and formed into ice. They disappear where the rate of melting exceeds
the rate of supply of ice. When a number of valley glaciers emerge from a mountain region
onto a plain, where they coalesce, they then form a piedmont glacier. Ice sheets are huge
masses of ice that extend over areas that may be of continental size; ice caps are of smaller
dimensions. At present, there are two ice sheets in the world, one extends over the continent
of Antarctica, whereas the other covers most of Greenland.
Glacial Erosion
Although pure ice is a comparatively ineffective agent as far as eroding massive rocks is con-
cerned, it does acquire rock debris, which enhances its abrasive power. The larger fragments
of rock embedded in the sole of a glacier tend to carve grooves in the path over which it
travels, whereas the finer material smoothes and polishes rock surfaces. Ice also erodes by a
quarrying process, whereby fragments are plucked from rock surfaces. Generally, quarrying
is a more effective form of glacial erosion than is abrasion.
The rate of glacial erosion is extremely variable and depends on the velocity of the glacier,
the weight of the ice, the abundance and physical character of the rock debris carried at the
bottom of the glacier and the resistance offered by the rocks of the glacier channel. The erodi-
bility of the surface over which a glacier travels varies with depth and, hence, with time. Once
the weathered overburden and open-jointed bedrock have been removed, the rate of glacial
erosion slackens. This is because quarrying becomes less effective and, hence, the quantity
of rock fragments contributed to abrasive action is gradually reduced.
Continental ice sheets move very slowly and may be effective agents of erosion only temporar-
ily,removing the weathered mantle from, and smoothing off the irregularities of, a landscape.
The pre-glacial relief features are consequently afforded some protection by the overlying ice
against denudation, although the surface is modified somewhat by the formation of hollows
and hummocks.
The commonest features produced by glacial abrasion are striations on rock surfaces that were
formed by rock fragments embedded in the base of the glacier. Many glaciated slopes formed
of resistant rocks that are well jointed display evidence of erosion in the form of ice-moulded
115
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.24
Crag and tail, Castle Rock, Edinburgh, Scotland. Castle Rock probably represents an early phase of volcanic activity associ-
ated with the volcano at Arthur’s Seat (Carboniferous).
hummocks that are known as roche moutonnées. Large, highly resistant obstructions, such
as volcanic plugs, which lie in the path of advancing ice, give rise to features called crag and
tail (Fig. 3.24). The resistant obstruction forms the crag and offers protection to the softer
rocks that occur on its leeward side.
Drumlins are mounds that are rather similar in shape to the inverted bowl of a spoon (Fig. 3.25).
They vary in composition, ranging from 100% bedrock to 100% glacial deposit. Obviously,
those types formed of bedrock originated as a consequence of glacial erosion, however, even
those composed of glacial debris were, at least in part, moulded by glacial action. Drumlins
range up to a kilometre in length, and some may be over 70 m in height. Usually, they do not
occur singly but in scores or even hundreds in drumlin fields.
Corries are located at the head of glaciated valleys, being the features in which ice accumu-
lated. Accordingly, they formed at the snowline, or close by. Corrie stairways are frequently
arranged in tiers up a mountain side. Because of their shape, corries are often likened to
amphitheatres in that they are characterized by steep backwalls and steep sides (Fig. 3.26).
Their floors are generally rock basins. Corries vary in size, some of the largest being about
1 km across. The dominant factor influencing their size is the nature of the rock in which they
were excavated.
The cross-profile of a glaciated valley is typically steep sided with a comparatively broad, flat
bottom, and it is commonly referred to as U-shaped (Fig. 3.27). Most glaciated valleys are
straighter than those of rivers because their spurs have been truncated by ice. In some
glaciated valleys, a pronounced bench or shoulder occurs above the steep walls of the trough.
Tributary streams of ice flow across the shoulders to the main glacier. When the ice disap-
pears, the tributary valleys are left hanging above the level of the trough floor. The valleys are
116
Chapter 3
Figure 3.25
Drumlins, near Downpatrick, Northern Ireland.
Figure 3.26
Corrie near Athabasca Glacier, Alberta, Canada.
117
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.27
Astepped “U”-shaped valley, Yosemke National Park, California.
then occupied by streams. Those in the hanging valleys cascade down the slopes of the main
trough as waterfalls. An alluvial cone may be deposited at the base of the waterfall.
Generally, glaciated valleys have a scalloped or stepped long profile, and sometimes the
head of the valley is terminated by a major rock step known as a trough end. Such rock steps
develop where a number of tributary glaciers, descending from corries at the head of the
valley, converge and thereby effectively increase the erosive power. A simple explanation of
a scalloped valley floor can be found in the character of the rock type. Not only is a glaciated
valley stepped, but reversed gradients are also encountered within its path. The reversed
gradients are located in rock-floored basins that occur along the valley. Rock basins appear
to be formed by localized ice action.
Fiords are found along the coasts of glaciated highland regions that have suffered recent sub-
mergence; they represent the drowned part of a glaciated valley. Frequently, a terminal rock
118
Chapter 3
barrier, the threshold, occurs near the entrance of a fiord. Some thresholds rise very close to
sea level, indeed some may be uncovered at low tide. However, water landward of the
thresholds is very often deeper than the known post-glacial rise in sea level. For example,
depths in excess of 1200 m have been recorded in some Norwegian fiords.
Glacial Deposits: Unstratified Drift
Glacial deposits form a more significant element of the landscape in lowland areas than they
do in highlands. Two kinds of glacial deposits are distinguished, namely, unstratified drift or till
and stratified drift. However, one type commonly grades into the other. Till is usually regarded
as being synonymous with boulder clay and is deposited directly by ice, while stratified drift
is deposited by melt waters or in proglacial lakes.
Till consists of a variable assortment of rock debris that ranges in size from fine rock flour to
boulders and is characteristically unsorted (Bell, 2002). The compactness of a till varies
according to the degree of consolidation undergone, the amount of cementation and size of
the grains. Tills that contain less than 10% clay fraction are usually friable, whereas those
with over 10% clay tend to be massive and compact.
Distinction has been made between tills derived from rock debris carried along at the base of
a glacier and those deposits that were transported within or at the terminus of the ice. The
former is sometimes referred to as lodgement till, whereas the latter is termed ablation till.
Lodgement till is commonly compact and fissile, and the fragments of rock it contains are fre-
quently orientated in the path of ice movement. Ablation till accumulates as the ice, in which the
parent material is entombed, melts. Hence, it is usually uncompacted and non-fissile, and the
boulders present display no particular orientation. Since ablation till consists only of the load
carried at the time of ablation, it usually forms a thinner deposit than does a lodgement till.
A moraine is an accumulation of material deposited directly from a glacier. There are six
types of moraines deposited by valley glaciers. Rock debris that a glacier wears from its valley
sides and which is supplemented by material falling from the valley slopes above the ice
forms the lateral moraine. When two glaciers become confluent, a medial moraine develops
from the merger of the two inner lateral moraines. Material that falls onto the surface of a gla-
cier and then makes its way via crevasses into the centre, where it becomes entombed, is
termed englacial moraine. Some of this debris, however, eventually reaches the base of the
glacier and enhances the material eroded from the valley floor. This constitutes the subglacial
moraine. The ground moraine is often distributed irregularly since it is formed when basal ice
becomes overloaded with rock debris and is forced to deposit some of it. The material that
is deposited at the snout of a glacier when the rate of wastage is balanced by the rate of
outward flow of ice is known as a terminal moraine (Fig. 3.28). Terminal moraines possess
119
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.28
Terminal moraine, Tasman Glacier, South Island, New Zealand.
acurved outline impressed upon them by the lobate nature of the snout of the ice. They are
usually discontinuous, being interrupted where streams of melt water issue from the glacier.
Frequently, a series of terminal moraines may be found traversing a valley, the farthest down-
valley marking the point of maximum extension of the ice, the others indicating pauses in
glacial retreat. The latter types are called recessional moraines.
Ground moraines and terminal moraines are the two principal types of moraines deposited
by ice sheets that spread over lowland areas. In lowland areas, the terminal moraines of ice
sheets may rise to heights of some 60 m. In plan, they commonly form a series of crescents,
each crescent corresponding to a lobe at the snout of the ice. If copious amounts of melt
water drain from the ice front, then morainic material is washed away, and hence a terminal
moraine either does not develop, or if it does, is of inconspicuous dimension.
Fluvio-Glacial Deposits; Stratified Drift
Stratified deposits of drift often are subdivided into two categories, namely, those deposits
that accumulate beyond the limits of the ice, forming in streams, lakes or seas, and those
deposits that develop in contact with the ice. The former types are referred to as pro-glacial
deposits, and the latter are termed ice-contact deposits.
120
Chapter 3
Most melt water streams that deposit outwash fans do not originate at the snout of a glacier
but from within or upon the ice. Many of the streams that flow through a glacier have steep
gradients and are, therefore, efficient transporting agents, but when they emerge at the
snout, they do so on to a shallower incline, and deposition results. Outwash deposits typically
are cross-bedded and range in size from boulders to coarse sand. When first deposited, the
porosity of these sediments varies from 25 to 50%. Therefore, they are very permeable and
so can resist erosion by local run-off. The finer silt–clay fraction is transported further down-
stream. Also, in this direction, an increasing amount of stream alluvium is contributed by trib-
utaries, so that eventually the fluvio-glacial deposits cannot be distinguished. Many outwash
masses are terraced.
Five different types of stratified drift deposited in glacial lakes have been recognized, namely,
terminal moraines, deltas, bottom deposits, ice-rafted erratics and beach deposits. Terminal
moraines that formed in glacial lakes differ from those that arose on land in that lacustrine
deposits are inter-stratified with drift. Glacial lake deltas are usually composed of sands and
gravels that are typically cross-bedded. By contrast, those sediments that accumulated on
the floors of glacial lakes are fine-grained, consisting of silts and clays. These fine-grained
sediments are sometimes composed of alternating laminae of finer and coarser grain size.
Each couplet has been termed a varve. Large boulders that occur on the floors of glacial
lakes were transported on rafts of ice and were deposited when the ice melted. Usually, the
larger the glacial lake, the larger were the beach deposits that developed about it. If changes
in lake level took place, then these may be represented by a terraced series of beach deposits.
Deposition that takes place at the contact of a body of ice is frequently sporadic and irregu-
lar. Locally, the sediments possess a wide range of grain size, shape and sorting. Most are
granular, and variations in their engineering properties reflect differences in particle size dis-
tribution and shape. Deposits often display abrupt changes in lithology and, consequently, in
relative density. They are deformed since they sag, slump or collapse as the ice supporting
them melts.
Kame terraces are deposited by melt water streams that flow along the contact between the
ice and the valley side (Fig. 3.29). The drift is derived principally from the glacier, although some
is supplied by tributary streams. They occur in pairs, one on each side of the valley. If a series
of kame terraces occur on the valley slopes, then each pair represents a pause in the process
of glacier thinning. The surfaces of these terraces are often pitted with kettle holes (depres-
sions where large blocks of ice remained unmelted while material accumulated around them).
Narrow kame terraces are usually discontinuous, spurs having impeded deposition.
Kames are mounds of stratified drift that originate as small deltas or fans built against the snout
of a glacier where a tunnel in the ice, along which melt water travels, emerges (Fig. 3.30).
121
Figure 3.29
Block diagram of a glaciated valley showing typical glacial and fluvio-glacial deposits.
Figure 3.30
Akame being exploited for sand, north of Lillehammer, Norway.
122
Chapter 3
Other small ridge-like kames accumulate in crevasses in stagnant or near-stagnant ice. Many
kames do not survive deglaciation for any appreciable period of time.
Eskers are long, narrow, sinuous, ridge-like masses of stratified drift that are unrelated to sur-
face topography (Fig. 3.29). For example, eskers may climb up valley sides and cross low
watersheds. They represent sediments deposited by streams that flowed within channels in
a glacier. Although eskers may be interrupted, their general continuity is easily discernible
and, indeed, some may extend lengthwise for several hundred kilometres. Eskers may reach
up to 50 m in height, and they range up to 200 m in width. Their sides are often steep. Eskers
are composed principally of sands and gravels, although silts and boulders are found within
them. These deposits are generally cross-bedded.
Other Glacial Effects
Ice sheets have caused diversions of drainage in areas of low relief. In some areas that were
completely covered with glacial deposits, the post-glacial drainage pattern may bear no rela-
tionship to the surface beneath the drift, indeed moraines and eskers may form minor water
divides. As would be expected, notable changes occurred at or near the margin of the ice.
Lakes were formed there that were drained by streams whose paths disregarded pre-glacial
relief. Evidence of the existence of pro-glacial lakes is to be found in the lacustrine deposits,
terraces and overflow channels that they leave behind.
Where valley glaciers extend below the snowline, they frequently pond back streams that flow
down the valley sides, giving rise to lakes. If any col between two valleys is lower than the
surface of the glacier occupying one of them, then the water from any adjacent lake dammed
by this glacier eventually spills into the adjoining valley, and in so doing, erodes an overflow
channel. Marginal spillways may develop along the side of a valley at the contact with the ice.
The enormous weight of an overlying ice sheet causes the Earth’s crust beneath it to sag.
Once the ice sheet disappears, the land slowly rises to recover its former position and,
thereby, restores isostatic equilibrium. Consequently, the areas of northern Europe and North
America presently affected by isostatic uplift more or less correspond with those areas that
were formerly covered with ice. At present, the rate of isostatic recovery, for example, in the
centre of Scandinavia, is approximately one metre per century. Isostatic uplift is neither regular
nor continuous. Consequently, the rise in the land surface so affected has been overtaken at
times by a rise in sea level. The latter was caused by melt water from the retreating ice sheets.
With the advance and retreat of ice sheets in Pleistocene times, the level of the sea fluctu-
ated. Marine terraces (strandlines) were produced during interglacial periods when the sea was
at a much higher level. The post-glacial rise in sea level has given rise to drowned coastlines
123
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
such as rias and fiords, young developing clifflines, aggraded lower stretches of river valleys,
buried channels, submerged forests, marshlands, shelf seas, straits and the reformation of
numerous islands.
Frozen Ground Phenomena in Periglacial Environments
Frozen ground phenomena are found in regions that experience a tundra climate, that is, in
those regions where the summer temperatures are only warm enough to cause thawing in
the upper metre or so of the soil. Beneath the upper or active zone, the subsoil is permanently
frozen and is hence known as the permafrost layer. Because of this layer, summer melt water
cannot seep into the ground, the active zone becomes waterlogged and the soils on gentle
slopes are liable to flow. Layers or lenses of unfrozen ground termed taliks may occur, often
temporarily, in the permafrost (Fig. 3.31).
Permafrost is an important characteristic, although it is not essential to the definition of
periglacial conditions, the latter referring to conditions under which frost action is the predom-
inant weathering agent. Permafrost covers 20% of the land surface of the Earth and, during
Pleistocene times, it was developed over an even larger area. Ground cover, surface water,
topography and surface materials all influence the distribution of permafrost. The temperature
Figure 3.31
Terminology of some features associated with permafrost.
124
Chapter 3
of perennially frozen ground below the depth of seasonal change ranges from slightly less
than 0 to - 12∞C. Generally, the higher the latitude, the lesser the depth of thaw. It is at a
minimum in peat or highly organic sediments and increases in clay, silt and sand to a maximum
in gravel, where it may extend to 2 m in depth.
Prolonged freezing gives rise to shattering in the frozen layer, fracturing taking place along
joints and cracks. Frost shattering, due to ice action in Pleistocene times, has been found to
extend to depths of 30 m in the Chalk and to 12 m in the Borrowdale Volcanic Series in
England, respectively. In this way, the concerned rock suffers a reduction in bulk density and
an increase in deformability and permeability. Fretting and spalling are particularly rapid
where the rock is closely fractured. Frost shattering may be concentrated along certain pre-
ferred planes if joint patterns are suitably oriented. Preferential opening takes place most fre-
quently in those joints that run more or less parallel with the ground surface. Silt and clay
frequently occupy the cracks in frost-shattered ground, down to appreciable depths, having
been deposited by melt water. Their presence may cause stability problems.
Stress relief following the disappearance of ice on melting may cause enlargement of joints.
This may aid failure on those slopes that were over-steepened by glaciation.
Stone polygons are common frozen-ground phenomena, and fossil forms are found in
Pleistocene strata. They consist of marginal rings of stone that embrace mounds of finer
material. Their diameters range up to 12 m.
Frost wedging is one of the chief factors of mechanical weathering in tundra regimes. Frozen
soils often display a polygonal pattern of cracks. Individual cracks may be 1.2 m wide at their
top, may penetrate to depths of 10 m and may be some 12 m apart. They form when,
because of exceptionally low temperatures, shrinkage of the ground occurs. Ice wedges
occupy these cracks and cause them to expand. When the ice disappears, an ice wedge
pseudomorph is formed by sediment, frequently sand, filling the crack.
Ground may undergo notable disturbance as a result of mutual interference of growing bodies
of ice or from excess pore water pressures developed in confined water-bearing lenses.
Involutions are plugs, pockets or tongues of highly disturbed material, generally possessing
inferior geotechnical properties, which have intruded into the overlying layers. They are
formed as a result of hydrostatic uplift in water trapped under a refreezing surface layer. They
are usually confined to the active layer. Involutions and ice wedge pseudomorphs usually mean
that one material suddenly replaces another. This can cause problems in shallow excavations.
The movement downslope as a viscous flow of saturated rock waste is referred to as solifluction.
It probably is the most significant process of mass wastage in tundra regions. Such movement
125
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
can take place down slopes with gradients as low as 2∞. The movement is extremely slow,
most measurements showing rates ranging between 10 and 300 mm per year. Solifluction
deposits commonly consist of gravels, which are characteristically poorly sorted, sometimes
gap graded and poorly bedded. These gravels consist of fresh, poorly worn, locally derived
material. Individual deposits are rarely more than 3 m thick and frequently display flow struc-
tures. Sheets and lobes of solifluction debris, transported by mudflow activity, are commonly
found at the foot of slopes. These materials may be reactivated by changes in drainage, by
stream erosion, by sediment overloading or during construction operations. Solifluction sheets
may be underlain by slip surfaces, the residual strength of which controls their stability.
Periglacial action accelerates hill creep, the latter being particularly well developed on thinly
bedded or cleaved rocks. Creep material may give way to solifluction deposits on approach-
ing the surface. The creep deposits consist mainly of flat rock fragments oriented parallel with
the hillside and are interrupted by numerous shallow slips.
Oversteepening of glaciated valleys and melt water channels occur when ground is stabilized
by deep permafrost or supported by ice masses. Frost sapping at the bottom of scarp fea-
tures also causes oversteepening. When the support disappears, the oversteepened slopes
become potentially unstable. Melt water in a shattered rock mass gives rise to an increase in
pore water pressures that, in turn, leads to movement or instability along bedding planes and
joints. Increase in the moisture content of cohesive material brings about a reduction in its
strength and may cause it to swell, thereby aggravating the instability, due to oversteepen-
ing, in the near-surface zone. As a result, landsliding on a large scale is associated with such
oversteepened slopes.
The solubility of carbon dioxide in water varies inversely with temperature, for example, it is
1.7 times greater at 0∞C than at 15∞C. Accordingly, cold melt waters have frequently had a
strong leaching effect on calcareous rocks. Some pipes and sinkholes in chalk may have
been produced by such melt waters. The problem of buried pipes and sinkholes in chalk
is aggravated by the frequent absence of surface evidence. They are often undetected by
conventional site investigation.
Wind Action and Desert Landscapes
By itself, wind can only remove uncemented rock debris or soil, which it can perform more
effectively if the material is dry rather than wet. But once armed with particles, the wind
becomes a noteworthy agent of abrasion. The size of the particles that the wind can transport
depends on the strength of the wind as well as the shape and weight of the particles. The
distance that the wind, given that its velocity remains constant, can carry particles depends
principally on their size.
126
Chapter 3
Wind Action
Wind erosion takes place when air pressure overcomes the force of gravity on surface particles.
At first, particles are moved by saltation. The impact of saltating particles on others may
cause them to move by creep, saltation or suspension. Saltation accounts for three-quarters
of the grains transported by wind, most of the remainder being carried in suspension, the rest
are moved by creep or traction. Saltating grains may rise to a height of up to 2 m, their
trajectory then being flattened by faster-moving air and tailing off as the grains fall to the
ground. The length of the trajectory is roughly ten times the height.
One of the most important factors in wind erosion is its velocity. Its turbulence, frequency,
duration and direction are also important. As far as the mobility of particles is concerned, the
important factors are their size, shape and density. It would appear that particles less than
0.1 mm in diameter are usually transported in suspension, those between 0.1 and 0.5 mm
are normally transported by saltation and those larger than 0.5 mm tend to be moved by trac-
tion or creep. Grains with a specific gravity of 2.65, such as quartz sand, are most suscepti-
ble to wind erosion in the size range 0.1 to 0.15 mm. A wind blowing at 12 km h- 1will move
grains of 0.2 mm diameter – a lesser velocity will keep the grains moving.
Because wind can only remove loose particles of a limited size range, if erosion is to proceed
beyond the removal of such particles, then the remaining material must be sufficiently broken
down by other agents of erosion or weathering. Material that is not sufficiently reduced in size
seriously inhibits further wind erosion. Obviously, removal of fine material leads to a propor-
tionate increase in that of larger size that cannot be removed. The latter affords increasing
protection against continuing erosion, and a wind-stable surface is eventually created. Binding
agents, such as silt, clay and organic matter, hold particles together, making wind erosion
more difficult. Soil moisture also contributes to cohesion between particles.
Generally, a rough surface tends to reduce the velocity of the wind immediately above it.
Consequently, particles of a certain size are not as likely to be blown away as they would on
a smooth surface. Even so, Bagnold (1941) found that grains of sand less than 0.03 mm in
diameter were not lifted by the wind if the surface on which they lay was smooth. On the other
hand, particles of this size can easily remain suspended by the wind. The longer the surface
distance over which a wind can blow without being interrupted, the more likely it is to attain
optimum efficiency.
There are three types of wind erosion, namely, deflation, attrition and abrasion. Deflation
results in the lowering of land surfaces by loose unconsolidated rock waste being blown away
by the wind. The effects of deflation are seen most acutely in arid and semi-arid regions. For
example, basin-like depressions are formed by deflation in the Sahara and Kalahari deserts.
127
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
However, downward lowering is almost invariably arrested when the water table is reached
since the wind cannot readily remove moist rock particles. What is more, deflation of sedi-
mentary material, particularly alluvium, creates a protective covering if the material contains
pebbles. The fine particles are removed by the wind, leaving a surface formed of pebbles that
are too large to be blown away. The suspended load carried by the wind is comminuted
further by attrition, turbulence causing the particles to collide vigorously with one another.
When the wind is armed with grains of sand, it possesses great erosive force, the effects of
which are best displayed in rock deserts. Accordingly, any surface subjected to prolonged
attack by wind-blown sand is polished, etched or fluted. Abrasion has a selective action, pick-
ing out the weaknesses in rocks. For example, discontinuities are opened and rock pinnacles
developed. Since the heaviest rock particles are transported near to the ground, abrasion is
there at its maximum and rock pedestals may be formed. In deserts, flat smoothed surfaces
produced by wind erosion are termed desert pavements.
The differential effects of wind erosion are illustrated in areas where alternating beds of hard
and soft rock are exposed. If strata are tilted steeply, a ridge and furrow relief develops,
because soft rocks are more readily worn away than hard. Such ridges are called yardangs.
Conversely, when an alternating series of hard and soft rocks are more or less horizontally
bedded, features known as zeugens are formed. In such cases, the beds of hard rock act as
resistant caps, affording protection to the soft rocks beneath. Nevertheless, any weaknesses
in the hard caps are picked out by weathering, and the caps are breached eventually, expos-
ing the underlying soft rocks. Wind erosion rapidly eats into the latter and, in the process, the
hard cap is undermined. As the action continues, tabular masses, known as mesas and
buttes, are left in isolation (Fig. 3.32).
Desert Dunes
About one-fifth of the land surface of the Earth is desert. Approximately four-fifths of this
desert area consists of exposed bedrock or weathered rock waste. The rest is mainly cov-
ered with deposits of sand. Bagnold (1941) recognized five main types of sand accumula-
tions, namely, sand drifts and sand shadows, whalebacks, low-scale undulations, sand
sheets and true dunes. He further distinguished two kinds of true dunes, the barkhan and the
seif (Fig. 3.33a and b).
Several factors control the form that an accumulation of sand adopts. Firstly, there is the rate
at which sand is supplied; secondly, there is wind speed, frequency and constancy of direc-
tion; thirdly, there is the size and shape of the sand grains; and fourthly, there is the nature
of the surface across which the sand is moved. Sand drifts accumulate at the exits of the
gaps in the landscape through which wind is channelled and are extended downwind.
128
Chapter 3
Figure 3.32
Buttes and mesas, Monument Valley, Utah.
However, such drifts, unlike true dunes, are dispersed if they are moved downwind. Whalebacks
are large mounds of comparatively coarse sand that are thought to represent the relics of seif
dunes. Presumably, the coarse sand is derived from the lower parts of seifs, where accumu-
lations of coarse sand are known to exist. These features develop in regions devoid of veg-
etation. By contrast, undulating mounds are found in the peripheral areas of deserts where the
patchy cover of vegetation slows the wind and creates sand traps. Large undulating mounds
are composed of fine sand. Sand sheets are also developed in the marginal areas of deserts.
These sheets consist of fine sand that is well sorted, indeed they often present a smooth sur-
face that is capable of resisting wind erosion. A barkhan is crescentic in outline and is orien-
tated at right angles to the prevailing wind direction, whereas a seif is a long, ridge-shaped
dune running parallel to the direction of the wind. Seif dunes are much larger than barkhans,
they may extend lengthwise for up to 90 km and reach heights up to 100 m. Barkhans are
rarely more than 30 m in height, and their width is usually about 12 times their height.
Generally, seifs occur in great numbers, running approximately equidistant from each other,
with the individual crests separated from each other by distances of 30 to 500 m.
It is commonly believed that sand dunes come into being where some obstacle prevents the
free flow of sand, sand piling up on the windward side of the obstacle to form a dune. But in
129
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.33
(a) Barkhan dunes, Death Valley, California. (b) Seif dunes, near Sossusvlei, Namibia.
130
Chapter 3
areas in which there is exceptionally low rainfall and, therefore, little vegetation to impede the
movement of sand, observation has revealed that dunes develop most readily on flat sur-
faces that are devoid of large obstacles. It would seem that where the size of the sand grains
varies or where a rocky surface is covered with pebbles, dunes grow over areas of width
greater than 5 m. Such patches exert a frictional drag on the wind, causing eddies to blow
sand towards them. Sand is trapped between the larger grains or pebbles, and an accumu-
lation results. If a surface is strewn with patches of sand and pebbles, deposition takes place
over the pebbles. However, patches of sand exert a greater frictional drag on strong winds
than do patches of pebbles, and deposition under such conditions thus takes place over the
former. When strong winds sweep over a rough surface, they become transversely unstable,
and barkhans may develop.
Longitudinal dunes may develop from barkhans. Suppose that for some reason the tails of a
barkhan become fixed, for example, by vegetation or by the water table rising to the surface.
Then the wind continues to move the central part until the barkhan eventually loses its convex
shape, becoming concave towards the prevailing wind. As the central area becomes further
extended, the barkhan may split. The two separated halves are rotated gradually by the eddy-
ing action of the wind until they run parallel to one another, in line with the prevailing wind
direction. Dunes that develop in this manner are often referred to as blow-outs.
Seif dunes appear to form where winds blow in two directions, that is, where the prevailing
winds are gentle and carry sand into an area, the sand then being driven by occasional strong
winds into seif-like forms. Seifs may also develop along the bisectrix between two diagonally
opposed winds of roughly equal strength. Because of their size, seif dunes can trap coarse
sand much more easily than can barkhans. This material collects along the lower flanks of
the dune. Indeed, barkhans sometimes occur in the troughs of seif dunes. On the other hand,
the trough may be floored by bare rock.
Salt Weathering and Duricrusts
Salt weathering is characteristic of hot deserts and leads to rock disintegration. This is brought
about as a result of the stresses set up in the pores, joints and fissures in rock masses due to
the growth of salts, the hydration of particular salts and the volumetric expansion that occurs
due to the high diurnal range of temperature. The aggressiveness of the ground depends on
the position of the water table and the capillary fringe above in relation to the ground surface;
the chemical composition of the groundwater and the concentration of salts within it; the type
of soil and the soil temperature. The pressures produced by the crystallization of salts in small
pores are appreciable. Some common salts hydrate and dehydrate relatively easily in response
to changes in temperature and humidity. Hydration increases the volume of the salts and,
131
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
hence, develops pressure within the pores or cracks in rocks. Such increase in volume may
be appreciable. What is more, some of these changes may take place rapidly. The hydration,
dehydration and rehydration of hydrous salts may occur several times throughout a year, and
depend on the temperature and relative humidity conditions on the one hand and dissocia-
tion vapour pressures of the salts on the other. New layers of minerals can be formed within
months, and thin layers can be dissolved just as quickly. In fact, Obika et al. (1989) indicated
that crystallization and hydration–dehydration thresholds of the more soluble salts such as
sodium chloride, sodium carbonate, sodium sulphate and magnesium sulphate may be crossed
at least once daily. Because of the high rate of evaporation in hot arid regions, the capillary
rise of near-surface groundwater is normally very pronounced (Al Sanad et al., 1990). Salts are
precipitated on the ground surface in the form of effluorescences and also are precipitated in
the upper layers of the soil. Nonetheless, the occurrence of salts is extremely variable from
place to place.
Salt weathering also attacks structures and buildings, leading to cracking, spalling and disin-
tegration of concrete, brick and stone. One of the most notable forms of damage to buildings
and structures is that attributable to sulphate attack (Robinson, 1995). The most serious
damage caused to brickwork and limestone and sandstone building stone occurs in low-lying
salinas or sabkhas (see Chapter 5), where saline groundwater occurs at shallow depth,
giving rise to aggressive ground conditions. Salt weathering of bituminous paved roads built
over areas where saline groundwater is at or near the surface is likely to result in notable signs
of damage such as heaving, cracking, blistering, stripping, potholing, doming and disintegration
(Blight, 1994).
Duricrust or pedocrete is a surface or near-surface hardened accumulation or encrusting
layer, formed by precipitation of salts on evaporation of saline groundwater. Duricrusts may
be composed of calcium or magnesium carbonate, gypsum, silica, alumina or iron oxide, or
even halite, in varying proportions. It may occur in a variety of forms, ranging from a few
millimetres in thickness to over a metre. A leached cavernous, porous or friable zone is fre-
quently found beneath the duricrust. Pedocretes refer to hardened surfaces that usually occur
on hard rock (e.g. calcrete), whereas duricrusts are softer accumulations (e.g. gypcrust)that
are usually found in salt playas, salinas or sabkhas. Locally, especially near the coast, sands
may be cemented with calcrete to form cap-rock or miliolite. Desert fill often consists of
mixtures of nodular calcrete, calcrete fragments and drifted sand.
Stream Action in Arid and Semi-Arid Regions
It must not be imagined that stream activity plays an insignificant role in the evolution of land-
scape in arid and semi-arid regions. Admittedly, the amount of rainfall occurring in arid regions
is small and irregular, whereas that of semi-arid regions is markedly seasonal. Nevertheless, it
132
Chapter 3
commonly falls in both instances as intense and often violent showers. The result is that the
river channels frequently cannot cope with the amount of rain water, and extensive flooding
takes place. These floods develop with remarkable suddenness and either form raging tor-
rents, which tear their way down slopes excavating gullies as they go, or they may assume
the form of sheet floods. Dry wadis are rapidly filled with swirling water and, thereby, are
enlarged. However, such floods are short lived since the water soon becomes choked with
sediment and the consistency of the resultant mudflow eventually reaches a point when fur-
ther movement is checked. Much water is lost by percolation, and mudflows are also checked
where there is an appreciable slackening in gradient.
Some of the most notable features produced by stream action in arid and semi-arid regions
are found in intermontane basins, that is, where mountains circumscribe a basin of inland
drainage. The rain that falls on the encircling mountains causes flooding and active erosion.
Mechanical weathering plays a significant role in the mountain zone. Boulders, 2 m or more
in diameter, are found in gullies that cut the mountain slopes, whereas finer gravels, sands
and muds are washed downstream.
Alluvial cones or fans, which consist of irregularly sorted sediment, are found along the foot
of the mountain belt where it borders the pediment, the marked change in gradient account-
ing for rapid deposition. The particles composing the cones are almost all angular in shape,
boulders and cobbles being more frequent upslope, grading downslope into fine gravels. The
cones have a fairly high permeability. When these alluvial cones merge into one another, they
form a bahada. The streams that descend from the mountains rarely reach the centre of the
basin since they become choked by their own deposits and split into numerous distributaries
that spread a thin veneer of gravels over the pediment.
Although stream flow on alluvial cones is ephemeral, flooding nevertheless can constitute a
serious problem, occurring along the margins of the main channels and in the zone deposi-
tion beyond the ends of supply channels. The flood waters are problematic because of their
high velocities and their variable sediment content. They also have a tendency to change
locations with successive floods, abandoning and creating channels in a relatively short time.
Hydrocompaction may occur on alluvial cones. The dried surface layer of these cones may
contain many voids. Percolating water frequently reduces the strength of the material that, in
turn, reduces the void space. This gives rise to settlement or hydrocompaction.
Pediments in semi-arid regions are graded plains cut by the lateral erosion of ephermeral
streams. They are adjusted to dispose off water efficiently, and the heavy rainfall character-
istic of semi-arid regions means that this is often in the form of sheet wash. Although laminar
flow occurs during sheet wash, it yields to turbulent flow as the flowing water deepens.
133
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The latter possesses much greater erosive power and occurs during and immediately after
heavy rainfall. This is why these pediments carry only a thin veneer of rock debris. With a
lesser amount of rainfall, there is insufficient water to form sheets, and it is confined to rills
and gullies. Aeolian and fluvial deposits, notably sand, also may be laid down in the interme-
diate zone between the pediment and the central depression or playa. However, if deflation
is active, this zone may be barren of sediments. Sands are commonly swept into dunes and
the resultant deposits are cross-bedded.
The central area of a basin is referred to as the playa, and it sometimes contains a
lake(Fig.3.34). This area is covered with deposits of sand, silt, clay and evaporites. The silts
and clays often contain crystals of salt whose development comminutes their host.Silts usu-
ally exhibit ripple marks, whereas clays are frequently laminated. Desiccation structures such
as mudcracks are developed on an extensive scale in these fine-grained sediments. If there
is a playa lake and it has contracted to leave a highly saline tract, then this area is termed a
salina. The capillary rise generally extends to the surface, leading to the formation of a salt
crust. Where the capillary rise is near to, but normally does not reach the surface, desicca-
tion ground patterns provide an indication of its closeness.
Figure 3.34
View across the playa of Death Valley, California. Note the alluvial fans merging into bahadas at the foot of the far mountain range.
134
Chapter 3
Figure 3.35
Terminology of beach features.
Coasts and Shorelines
The shore zone can be divided into the coast, the shore and the offshore (Fig. 3.35). The
coast has been defined as the land immediately behind the cliffs, whereas the shore is
regarded as that area between the base of the cliffs and low-water mark. That area that
extends seawards from the low-water mark is termed the offshore. The shore itself is further
divided into foreshore and backshore, the former embracing the intertidal zone, while the
latter extends from the foreshore to the cliffs.
Wave Action
When wind blows across the surface of deep water, it causes an orbital motion of the water
particles in the plane, normal to the wind direction. Because adjacent particles are at differ-
ent stages of their circular course, a wave is produced. The motion is transmitted to the water
beneath the surface, but the orbitals are rapidly reduced in size with increasing depth, and the
motion dies out at a depth equal to that of the wavelength (Fig. 3.36). There is no progres-
sive forward motion of the water particles in such a wave, although the form of the wave
profile moves rapidly in the direction in which the wind is blowing. Such waves are described
as oscillatory waves.
The parameters of a wave are the wavelength, L, that is, the horizontal distance between
each crest or each trough, the wave height, H, the vertical distance between the crest and
135
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.36
Orbital motion of water particles during the passage of an idealized sinusoidal wave in deep water. The orbital diameter
decreases with depth and disappears at a depth of approximately one half the wave length.
the trough, and the wave period, T, the time interval between the passage of successive
wave crests. The rate of propagation of the wave form is the wavelength divided by the wave
period. The height and period of waves are functions of the wind velocity, the fetch (i.e. the
distance over which the wind blows) and the length of time for which the wind blows.
Fetch is the most important factor determining wave size and efficiency of transport. Winds of
moderate force that blow over a wide stretch of water generate larger waves than do strong
winds that blow across a short reach. Where the fetch is less than 32 km, the wave height
increases directly with, and the wave period increases as the square root of, the wind velocity.
Long waves only develop where the fetch is large, for instance, the largest waves are gener-
ated in the southern oceans where their lengths may exceed 600 m and their periods may be
greater than 20 s. Usually, wavelengths in the open sea are less than 100 m, and the speed
of propagation is approximately 50 km h- 1.
Those waves that are developed in storm centres in the centre of an ocean may journey to
its limits. This explains why large waves may occur along a coast during fine weather.
Waves frequently approach a coastline from different areas of generation. If they are in oppo-
sition, then their height is decreased, whereas their height is increased if they are in phase.
Four types of waves have been distinguished, that is, forced, swell, surf and forerunners. Forced
waves are those formed by the wind in the generating area; they are usually irregular.On moving
out of the area of generation, the waves become long and regular. They are then referred to
as swell or free waves. As these waves approach a shoreline, they feel the bottom, which
136
Chapter 3
disrupts their pattern of motion, changing them from oscillation to translation waves; in other
words, they break into surf. The longest and lowest waves are termed forerunners or swell.
The breaking of a wave is influenced by its steepness, the slope of the sea floor and the pres-
ence of an opposing or supplementary wind. When waves enter waters equal in depth to their
wavelength, they begin to feel the bottom and their length decreases, while their height
increases. Their velocity of travel or celerity, c, is also reduced, in accordance with the
expression:
È gL Ê 2p Zˆ ˘ 1/2
c=Í tanhÁ ˜ ˙ (3.9)
Î 2p Ë L ¯ ˚
where L is the wavelength, Z is the depth of the water and g is acceleration due to gravity.
As a result, the wave steepens until the wave train consists of peaked crests separated by
relatively flat troughs. The wave period, however, remains constant. Wave steepening accel-
erates towards the breaker zone, and the wave height grows to several times what it was in
deep water. Three types of breaking waves are recognized, plunging, spilling and surging or
swash. Plunging breakers collapse when their wave height is approximately equal to the
depth of the water. They topple suddenly and fall with a crash. They are usually a consequence
of long, low swell, and their formation is favoured by opposing winds. Spilling breakers begin
to break when the wave height is just over one-half of the water depth, and they do so grad-
ually over some distance. Generally, they result from steep wind waves, and they commonly
occur when the wind is blowing in the direction of wave propagation. Surging breakers or
swash rush up the beach and are usually encountered on beaches with steep profiles. The
term backwash is used to describe the water that subsequently descends the beach slope.
Four dynamic zones have been recognized within the nearshore current system of the beach
environment. They are the breaker zone, the surf zone, the transition zone and the swash zone.
The breaker zone is that in which waves break. The surf zone refers to that region between the
breaker zone and the effective seaward limit of the backwash. The presence and width of a surf
zone is primarily a function of the beach slope and tidal phase. Those beaches that have gentle
foreshore slopes are often characterized by wide surf zones during all tidal phases, whereas
steep beaches seldom possess this zone. The transition zone includes that region where back-
wash interferes with the water at the leading edge of the surf zone, and it is characterized by high
turbulence. That region where water moves up and down the beach is termed the swash zone.
Swash tends to pile water against the shore. After flowing parallel to the beach, the water
runs back to the sea in narrow flows called rip currents. In the neighbourhood of the breaker
zone, rip currents extend from the surface to the floor, whereas in the deeper reaches, they
137
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
override the bottom water that still maintains an overall onshore motion. The positions of rip
currents are governed by submarine topography, coastal configuration and the height and
period of the waves. They frequently occur on the up-current sides of points and on either
side of convergences where the water moves away from the centre of convergence and turns
seawards. The onshore movement of water by wave action in the breaker zone; the lateral
transport by longshore currents in the breaker zone; the seaward return of flow as rip currents
through the surface zone; and the longshore movement in the expanding head of a rip cur-
rent, all form part of the nearshore circulation system.
Tides may play an important part in beach processes. In particular, the tidal range is respon-
sible for the area of the foreshore over which waves are active. Tidal streams are especially
important where a residual movement resulting from differences between ebb and flood
occurs, and where there is abundant loose sediment for the tidal streams to transport. They
are frequently fast enough to carry coarse sediment, but the features, notably bars, normally
associated with tidal streams in the offshore zone or in tidal estuaries usually consist of sand.
Therefore, these features only occur where sufficient sand is available. In quieter areas, tidal
mud flats and salt marshes are developed, where the tide ebbs and floods over large flat
expanses, depositing muddy material. Mud also accumulates in runnels landward of high
ridges, in lagoons and on the lower foreshore where shelter is provided by offshore bars.
Marine Erosion
Coasts undergoing erosion display two basic elements of the coastal profile, namely, the cliff
and the bench or platform. In any theoretical consideration of the evolution of a coastal profile,
it is assumed that the coast is newly uplifted above sea level. After some time, a wave-cut
notch may be excavated, and its formation intensifies marine erosion in this narrow zone. The
development of a notch varies according to the nature of the rock in which excavation is
proceeding, for example, it may be present if the sediments are unconsolidated or if the bedding
planes dip seawards. Where a notch develops, it gives rise to a bench, and the material
above is undermined and collapses to form a cliff face.
Pot holes are common features on most wave-cut benches; they are excavated by pebbles
and boulders being swilled around in depressions. As they increase in diameter, they coa-
lesce and so lower the surface of the bench. The debris produced by cliff recession gives rise
to a rudimentary beach. In tidal seas, the base of a cliff is generally at high-tide level, whereas
in non-tidal seas, it usually is above still-water level.
As erosion continues, the cliff increases in height, and the bench widens. The slope adopted
by the bench below sea level is determined by the ratio of the rate of erosion of the slope to
the recession of the cliff. A submarine accumulation terrace forms in front of the bench and
138
Chapter 3
is extended out to sea. Because of the decline in wave energy consequent on the formation
of a wide flat bench, the submarine terrace deposits may be spread over the lower part of the
bench in the final stages of its development. The rate of cliff recession is therefore retarded,
and the cliff becomes gently sloping and moribund.
If the relationship between the land and sea remains constant, then erosion and, consequently,the
recession of land beneath the sea is limited. Although sand can be transported at a depth of half
the length of storm waves, bedrock is abraded at half this depth or less. As soon as asubma-
rine bench slope of 0.01 to 0.05 is attained, bottom abrasion generally ceases, and any further
deepening is brought about by organisms or chemical solution. Such rock destructioncan occur
at any depth, but the floor can only be lowered where currents remove the altered material.
The nature of the impact of a wave on a coastline depends to some extent on the depth of
the water and partly on the size of the wave. The vigour of marine action drops sharply with
increasing depth from the water surface, in fact, at approximately the same rate as the
decline in the intensity of wave motion. Erosion is unlikely to take place at a depth of more
than 60 m along the coast of an open sea and at less than that in closed seas.
If deep water occurs alongside cliffs, then waves may be reflected without breaking and, in
so doing, they may interfere with incoming waves. In this way, clapotis (standing waves that
do not migrate) are formed. It is claimed that the oscillation of standing waves causes an
alternate increase and decrease of pressure along discontinuities in rocks that occur in that
part of the cliff face below the waterline. Also, when waves break, a jet of water is thrown against
the cliff at approximately twice the velocity of the wave and, for a few seconds, this increases
the pressure within the discontinuities. Such action gradually dislodges blocks of rock.
Those waves with a period of approximately 4 s are usually destructive, whereas those with
a lower frequency, that is, a period of about 7 s or over, are constructive. When high-
frequency waves collapse, they form plunging breakers, and the mass of water is accordingly
directed downwards at the beach. In such instances, swash action is weak and, because of
the high frequency of the waves, is impeded by the backwash. As a consequence, material
is removed from the top of the beach. The motion within waves that have a lower frequency
is more elliptical and produces a strong swash that drives material up the beach. In this case,
the backwash is reduced in strength because water percolates into the beach deposits and,
therefore, little material is returned down the beach. Although large waves may throw mate-
rial above the high water level and thus act as constructive agents, they nevertheless have
an overall tendency to erode the beach, whereas small waves are constructive.
Swash is relatively ineffective compared to backwash on some shingle beaches. This
frequently leads to very rapid removal of the shingle from the foreshore into the deeper water
139
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
beyond the breakpoint. Storm waves on such beaches, however, may throw some pebbles
to considerable elevations above mean sea level, creating a storm-beach ridge and, because
of the rapid percolation of water through the shingle, backwash does not remove these
pebbles. On the other hand, when steep storm waves attack a sand beach, they are usually
destructive and, the coarser the sand, the greater the quantity that is removed. Some of
thissand may form a submarine bar at the break point, whereas some is carried into deeper
water offshore. It is by no means a rarity for the upper part of a beach to be removed by storm
waves.
Waves usually leave little trace on massive smooth rocks except to polish them. However,
where there are irregularities or projections on a cliff face, the upward spray of breaking
waves quickly removes them (the force of upward spray along a seawall can be as much as
12 times that of the horizontal impact of the wave).
The degree to which rocks are traversed by discontinuities affects the rate at which they are
removed by marine erosion. In particular, the attitude of joints and bedding planes is impor-
tant. Where the bedding planes are vertical or dip inland, the cliff recedes vertically under
marine attack. But if beds dip seawards, blocks of rock are dislodged more readily, since the
removal of material from the base of the cliff means that the rocks above lack support and
tend to slide into the sea. Joints may be enlarged into deep narrow inlets. Marine erosion also
is concentrated along fault planes.
The height of a cliff is another factor that influences the rate at which coastal erosion takes
place. The higher the cliff, the more material falls when its base is undermined. This, in turn,
means that a greater amount of debris has to be broken down and removed before the cliff
is once more attacked with the same vigour.
Erosive forms of local relief include such features as wave-cut notches, caves, blowholes,
marine arches and stacks (Fig. 3.37). Marine erosion is concentrated in areas along a coast
where the rocks offer less resistance. Caves and small bays or coves are excavated where
the rocks are softer or strongly jointed. At the landward end of large caves, there is often an
opening to the surface, through which spray issues, which is known as a blowhole. Blowholes
are formed by the collapse of jointed blocks loosened by wave-compressed air. A marine
arch is developed when two caves on opposite sides of a headland unite. When the arch falls,
the isolated remnant of the headland is referred to as a stack.
Wave refraction is the process whereby the direction of wave travel changes because of
changes in the topography of the nearshore sea floor. When waves approach a straight
beach at an angle, they tend to swing parallel to the shore due to the retarding effect of the
shallowing water. At the break point, such waves seldom approach the coast at an angle
140
Chapter 3
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.37 (Continued)
(a) Marine arch, south coast of California. (b) Stacks, the Seven Apostles, off the southern coast of Victoria, Australia.
141
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
(c)
Figure 3.37, cont’d
(c) Blowhole, Pancake Rocks, South Island, New Zealand.
exceeding 20∞, irrespective of the offshore angle to the beach. As the waves break, they
develop a longshore current, indeed wave refraction is often the major factor in dictating the
magnitude and direction of longshore drift. Wave refraction also is responsible for the con-
centration of erosion on headlands that leads to a coast being gradually smoothed in outline.
As waves approach an irregular shoreline refraction causes them to turn into shallower water
so that the wave crests run roughly parallel to the depth contours. Along an indented coast,
shallower water is met with first off headlands. This results in wave convergence and an
increase in wavelength, with wave crests becoming concave towards headlands. Conversely,
where waves move towards a depression in the sea floor, they diverge, are decreased in
height and become convex towards the shoreline.
Constructive Action of the Sea
Beaches may be supplied with sand that is derived almost entirely from the adjacent sea
floor, although in some areas, a larger proportion is produced by cliff erosion. During periods
of low waves, the differential velocity between onshore and offshore motion is sufficient to
move sand onshore except where rip currents are operational. Onshore movement is partic-
ularly notable when long-period waves approach a coast, whereas sand is removed from the
foreshore during high waves of short period.
142
Chapter 3
Table 3.2. Average beach slopes compared with sediment diameters
Beach sediment Particle size (mm) Average slope of beach
Fine sand 0.06–0.20 1–3∞
Medium sand 0.2–0.6 3–5∞
Coarse sand 0.6–2.0 5–9∞
Fine gravel 2.0–6.0 9–12∞
Medium gravel 6.0–20.0 12–17∞
Coarse gravel 20.0–60.0 17–24∞
Cobbles 60.0–200.0 Over 24∞
The beach slope is produced by the interaction of swash and backwash. It is also related to
the grain size and permeability of the beach (Table 3.2). For example, the loss of swash due
to percolation into beaches composed of grains that are 4 mm in median diameter is ten
times greater than into those where the grains average 1 mm. As a result, there is almost as
much water in the backwash on fine sandy beaches as there is in the swash, so the beach
profile is gentle and the sand is hard packed.
The waves that produce the most conspicuous constructional features on a shingle beach are
storm waves. A small foreshore ridge develops on a shingle beach at a limit of the swash
when constructional waves are operative. Similar ridges or berms may form on a beach com-
posed of coarse sand. Berms represent a marked change in slope and usually occur a small
distance above the high water mark. However, they may be overtopped by high spring tides.
Berms are not such conspicuous features on beaches of fine sand. Greater accumulation
occurs on coarse sandy beaches because their steeper gradient means that the wave energy
is dissipated over a relatively narrow width of beach.
Beach cusps and sandbars are constructional features of small size. The former are com-
monly found on shingle beaches. They consist of a series of ridges composed of shingle that
are separated by troughs in which finer material occurs. Sandbars are characteristic of tide-
less seas. Their location is related to the breakpoint that, in turn, is related to wave size.
Consequently, more than one bar may form, the outermost being attributable to storm waves,
the inner to normal waves. On tidal beaches, the breakpoint migrates over a wide zone;
hence, sandbars do not form and they may be replaced by ripple marks.
When waves move parallel to the coast, they simply move sand and shingle up and down the
beach. On the other hand, when they approach the coast at an angle, material is moved up
the beach by the swash in the direction normal to that of wave approach, and it is then rolled
down the steepest slope of the beach by the backwash. Consequently, material is moved in
a zigzag path along the beach. This is known as longshore or littoral drift. Such action can
143
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
transport pebbles appreciable distances along a coast. The duration of movement along a
coastline is dependent on the direction of the dominant winds. An indication of the direction
of longshore drift is provided by the orientation of spits along a coast.
Material may be supplied to the littoral sediment budget by coastal erosion, by feed from offshore
or by contributions from rivers. After sediment has been distributed along the coast by longshore
drift, it may be deposited in a sediment reservoir and, therefore, lost from the active environment.
Sediment reservoirs formed offshore take the form of bars where the material is in a state of
dynamic equilibrium, but from which it may easily re-enter the system. Dunes are the common-
est types of onshore reservoirs, from which sediment is less likely to re-enter the system.
Bay-head beaches are one of the commonest types of coastal deposits, and they tend to
straighten a coastline. Wave refraction causes longshore drift to move from headlands to
bays where sediments are deposited. Marine deposition also helps straighten coastlines by
building beach plains.
Spits are deposits that grow out from the coast. They are supplied with material chiefly by
longshore drift. Their growth is spasmodic and alternates with episodes of retreat. The stages
in the development of many complex spits and forelands are marked by beach ridges that fre-
quently are continuous over long distances. While longshore drift provides the material for
construction, their development results from spasmodic progradation by frontal wave accre-
tion during major storms. The distal end of a spit is frequently curved (Fig. 3.38). Those spits
that extend from the mainland to link up with an island are known as tombolas.
Bay-bars are constructed across the entrance to bays by the growth of a spit being contin-
ued from one headland to another. Bays may also be sealed off if spits, which grow from both
headlands, merge. If two spits extending from an island meet, they form a looped bar.
A cuspate bar arises either where a change in a direction of spit growth takes place so that
it eventually joins the mainland again, or where two spits coalesce. If progradation occurs,
then cuspate bars give rise to cuspate forelands (Fig. 3.39).
Offshore bars or barriers consist of ridges of shingle or sand. They usually project above sea
level, extend for several kilometres and are located a few kilometres offshore.
Storm Surges and Tsunamis
Except where caused by failure of protection works, marine inundation is almost always
attributable to severe meteorological conditions, giving rise to abnormally high sea levels,
referred to as storm surges. A storm surge can be regarded as the magnitude of sea level
144
Figure 3.38
Hurst Castle Spit with recurved laterals, Hampshire, England.
Figure 3.39
Acuspate foreland, Dungeness, Kent, England.
145
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 3.40
Flooded polder at St Philipsand, The Netherlands, January 1953.
along the shoreline that is above the normal seasonally adjusted high-tide level. Low pres-
sure and driving winds during a storm may lead to marine inundation of low-lying coastal
areas, particularly if they coincide with high spring tides. This is especially the case when
the coast is unprotected. Floods may be frequent, as well as extensive where flood plains are
wide and the coastal area is flat. Coastal areas that have been reclaimed from the sea and
are below high-tide level are vulnerable if coastal defences are breached (Fig. 3.40). Storm
surge risk is often associated with a particular season. The height and location of storm
damage along a coast over a period of time, when analyzed, provides some idea of the max-
imum likely elevation of surge effects. The seriousness of the damage caused by storm surge
tends to be related to the height and velocity of water movement.
Factors that influence storm surges include the intensity in the fall in atmospheric pressure,
the length of water over which the wind blows, the storm motion and offshore topography.
Obviously, the principal factor influencing storm surge is the intensity of the causative
storm, the speed of the wind piling up the sea against the coastline. For instance, threshold
146
Chapter 3
windspeeds of approximately 120 km h- 1 tend to be associated with central pressure drops
of around 34 mbar. Normally, the level of the sea rises with reductions in atmospheric pres-
sure associated with intense-low-pressure systems. In addition, the severity of a surge is
influenced by the size and track of a storm and, especially in the case of open coastline
surges, by the nearness of the storm track to the coastline. The wind direction and the length
of fetch are also important, both determining the size and energy of waves. Because of the
influence of the topography of the sea floor, wide shallow areas on the continental shelf are
more susceptible to damaging surges than where the shelf slopes steeply. Surges are inten-
sified by converging coastlines that exert a funnel effect as the sea moves into such inlets.
One of the most terrifying phenomena that occur along coastal regions is called tsunami, the
inundation by a large mass of water (Fig. 3.41). Most tsunamis originate as a result of fault
movement, generating earthquakes on the sea floor, although they also can be developed by
submarine landslides or volcanic activity. However, even the effects of large earthquakes are
relatively localized compared to the impact of tsunamis. As with other forms of waves, it is
the energy of tsunamis that is transported, and not the mass. Oscillatory waves are devel-
oped with periods of 10 to 60 min that affect the whole column of water from the bottom of
the ocean to the surface. Together with the magnitude of an earthquake and its depth of
focus, the amount of vertical crustal displacement determine the size, orientation and
Figure 3.41
The northern end of Resurrection Bay at Seward, Alaska, after it had been affected by a tsunami. The epicentre of the
earthquake was 75 km distant.
147
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
destructiveness of tsunamis. Due to the long period of tsunamis, the waves are of great length
(e.g. 200 to 700 km in the open ocean, 50 to 150 km on the continental shelf). Therefore, it is
almost impossible to detect tsunamis in the open ocean because their amplitudes (0.1 to 1.0 m)
are extremely small in relation to their length. They can only be detected near the shore.
Soloviev (1978) devised a classification of tsunami intensity, as given in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3. Scale of tsunami intensity (Soloviev 1978)
Run-up Frequency in
Intensity height (m) Description of tsunami Pacific Ocean
I 0.5 Very slight. Wave so weak as to One per hour
be perceptible only on tidal gauge records.
II 1 Slight. Waves noticed by people living One per month
along the shore and familiar with the sea.
On very flat shores, waves are
generally noticed.
III 1 Rather large. Generally noticed. Flooding of One per 8 months
gently sloping coasts. Light sailing vessels
carried away on shore. Slight damage to
light structures situated near the coast.
In estuaries, reversal of river flow for
some distance upstream.
IV 4 Large. Flooding of the shore to some depth. One per year
Light scouring on made ground.
Embankments and dykes damaged.
Light structures near the coast damaged.
Solid structures on the coast lightly
damaged. Large sailing vessels and small
ships swept inland or carried out to sea.
Coasts littered with floating debris.
V 8 Very large. General flooding of the shore to Once in 3 years
some depth. Quays and other heavy
structures near the sea damaged. Light
structures destroyed. Severe scouring of
cultivated land and littering of the coast
with floating objects, fish and other sea
animals. With the exception of large ships,
all vessels carried inland or out to sea.
Large bores in estuaries. Harbour works
damaged. People drowned, waves
accompanied by a strong roar.
VI 16 Disastrous. Partial or complete destruction Once in 10 years
of man-made structures for some
distance from the shore. Flooding of
coasts to great depths. Large ships
severely damaged. Trees uprooted or
broken by the waves. Many casualties.
148
Chapter 3
Free oscillations develop when tsunamis reach the continental shelf, which modify their form.
Usually, the largest oscillation level is not the first but one of the subsequent oscillations.
However, to the observer on the coast, a tsunami appears not as a sequence of waves but
as a quick succession of floods and ebbs (i.e. a rise and fall of the ocean as a whole) because
of the great wavelength involved. Shallow water permits tsunamis to increase in amplitude
without significant reduction in velocity and energy. On the other hand, where the water is rel-
atively deep off a shoreline, the growth in size of the wave is restricted. Large waves, several
metres in height, are most likely when tsunamis move into narrowing inlets.
Usually, the first wave is like a very rapid change in tide. For example, the sea level may
change 7 or 8 m in 10 min. A bore occurs where there is a concentration of wave energy by
funnelling, as in bays, or by convergence, as on points. A steep front rolls over relatively quiet
water. Behind the front, the crest of such a wave is broad and flat, and the wave velocity is
about 30 km h- 1. Along rocky coasts, large blocks of material may be dislodged and moved
shoreward.
149
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 4
Groundwater Conditions and Supply
The Origin and Occurrence of Groundwater
The principal source of groundwater is meteoric water, that is, precipitation. However,
two other sources are occasionally of some consequence. These are juvenile water
and connate water. The former is derived from magmatic sources, whereas the latter
represents the water in which sediments are deposited. Connate water is trapped in the pore
spaces of sedimentary rocks as they are formed and has not been expelled.
The amount of water that infiltrates into the ground depends on how precipitation is dispersed,
namely, on the proportions that are assigned to immediate run-off and to evapotranspiration,
the remainder constituting the proportion allotted to infiltration/percolation. Infiltration refers to
the seepage of surface water into the ground, percolation being its subsequent movement,
under the influence of gravity, to the zone of saturation. In reality, one cannot be separated
from the other. The infiltration capacity is influenced by the rate at which rainfall occurs (which
also affects the quantity of water available), the vegetation cover, the porosity of the soils and
rocks, their initial moisture content and the position of the zone of saturation.
The retention of water in soil depends on the capillary force and the molecular attraction
of the particles. As the pores in the soil become thoroughly wetted, the capillary force declines,
so that gravity becomes more effective. In this way, downward percolation can continueafter
infiltration has ceased but the capillarity increases in importance as the soil dries. No further
percolation occurs after the capillary and gravity forces are balanced. Thus, water percolates
into the zone of saturation when the retention capacity is satisfied. This means that the rains
that occur after the deficiency of soil moisture has been catered for are those that count
as far as supplementing groundwater is concerned.
The Water Table or Phreatic Surface
The pores within the zone of saturation are filled with water, generally referred to as phreatic
water. The upper surface of this zone is therefore known as the phreatic surface but is more
commonly termed the water table. Above the zone of saturation is the zone of aeration
151
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in which both air and water occupy the pores. The water in the zone of aeration is referred
to as vadose water. This zone is divided into three subzones, those of soil water, the
intermediate belt and the capillary fringe. The uppermost or soil water belt discharges water
into the atmosphere in perceptible quantities by evapotranspiration. In the capillary fringe,
which occurs immediately above the water table, water is held in the pores by capillary action.
An immediate belt occurs when the water table is far enough below the surface for the soil
water belt not to extend down to the capillary fringe. The degree of saturation decreases from
the water table upwards.
The geological factors that influence percolation not only vary from one recharge area to
another but may do so within the same one. This, together with the fact that rain does not fall
evenly over a given area, means that the contribution to the zone of saturation is variable.
This, in turn, influences the position of the water table, as do the points of discharge. A rise
in the water table as a response to percolation is controlled partly by the rate at which water
can drain from the area of recharge. Accordingly, it tends to be greatest in areas of low trans-
missivity (see below). Mounds and ridges form in the water table under the areas of greatest
recharge. Superimpose on these the influence of water draining from lakes and streams, and it
can be appreciated that a water table is continually adjusting towards equilibrium. Because of
the low flow rates in most rocks, this equilibrium is rarely, if ever, attained before another
disturbance occurs. By using measurements of groundwater levels obtained from wells
and by observing the levels at which springs discharge, it is possible to construct groundwater
contour maps showing the form and elevation of the water table (Fig. 4.1).
The water table fluctuates in position, particularly in those climates where there are marked
seasonal changes in rainfall. Hence, permanent and intermittent water tables can be distin-
guished, the former marking the level beneath which the water table does not sink, whereas
the latter is an expression of the fluctuation. Usually, water tables fluctuate within the lower
and upper limits rather than between them, this is especially the case in humid regions since
the periods between successive recharges are small. The position at which the water table
intersects the surface is termed the spring line. Intermittent and permanent springs similarly
can be distinguished.
A perched water table is one that forms above a discontinuous impermeable layer such as
a lens of clay in a formation of sand, the clay impounding a water mound.
Aquifers, Aquicludes and Aquitards
An aquifer is the term given to a rock or soil mass that not only contains water but from which
water can be abstracted readily in significant quantities. The ability of an aquifer to transmit
152
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1
Map of part of Nottinghamshire showing the water table in the Bunter Sandstone (now the Sherwood Sandstone).
water is governed by its permeability. Indeed, the permeability of an aquifer usually is in excess
of 10- 5m s- 1.
By contrast, a formation with a permeability of less than 10- 9m s- 1is one that, in engineer-
ing terms, is regarded as impermeable and is referred to as an aquiclude. For example, clays
and shales are aquicludes. Even when such rocks are saturated, they tend to impede the flow
of water through stratal sequences.
153
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
An aquitard is a formation that transmits water at a very slow rate but that, over a large area
of contact, may permit the passage of large amounts of water between adjacent aquifers that
it separates. Sandy clays provide an example.
An aquifer is described as unconfined when the water table is open to the atmosphere, that is, the
aquifer is not overlain by material of lower permeability (Fig. 4.2a). Conversely, a confined aquifer
is one that is overlain by impermeable rocks (Fig. 4.2a). Confined aquifers may have relatively
small recharge areas as compared with unconfined aquifers and, therefore, may yield less water.
A leaky aquifer is one which is overlain and/or underlain by aquitard(s) (Fig. 4.2b).
Very often, the water in a confined aquifer is under piezometric pressure, that is, there is an
excess of pressure sufficient to raise the groundwater above the base of the overlying bed
when the aquifer is penetrated by a well. Piezometric pressures are developed when the
Figure 4.2
(a) Diagram illustrating unconfined and confined aquifers with a perched water table in the vadose zone. (b) Diagram illustrating
a leaky aquifer.
154
Chapter 4
buried upper surface of a confined aquifer is lower than the water table in the aquifer at its
recharge area. Where the piezometric surface is above ground level, the water overflows
from a well. Such wells are described as artesian. A synclinal structure is the commonest
cause of artesian conditions (Fig. 4.3a). Other geological structures that give rise to artesian
conditions are illustrated in Figure 4.3b. The term subartesian is used to describe those
Figure 4.3
(a) Section across an artesian basin; (b) other examples of artesian conditions (permeable layer, stippled, sandwiched between
impermeable beds).
155
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
conditions in which the groundwater is not under sufficient piezometric pressure to rise to
the ground surface.
Capillary Movement in Soil
Capillary movement in soil refers to the movement of moisture through the minute pores
between the soil particles that act as capillaries. It takes place as a consequence of surface
tension, therefore moisture can rise from the water table. This movement, however, can
occur in any direction, not just vertically upwards. It occurs whenever evaporation takes place
from the surface of the soil, thereby exerting a “surface tension pull” on the moisture, the
forces of surface tension increasing as evaporation proceeds. Accordingly, capillary moisture
is in hydraulic continuity with the water table and is raised against the force of gravity.
Equilibrium is attained when the forces of gravity and surface tension are balanced.
The boundary separating capillary moisture from the gravitational groundwater in the zone
of saturation is ill-defined and cannot be determined accurately. The zone immediately above
the water table that is saturated with capillary moisture is referred to as the closed capillary
fringe, whereas above this, air and capillary moisture exist together in the pores of the open
capillary fringe. The height of the capillary fringe depends largely on the particle size distri-
bution and density of the soil mass that, in turn, influence pore size. In other words, the
smaller the pore size, the greater is the height of the fringe. For example, capillary moisture
can rise to great heights in clay soils but the movement is very slow (Table 4.1). The height
of the capillary fringe in soils that are poorly graded generally varies, whereas in uniformly
textured soils, it attains roughly the same height. Where the water table is at shallow depth
and the maximum capillary rise is large, moisture is continually attracted from the water table,
due to evaporation from the surface, so that the uppermost soil is near saturation.
Below the water table, the groundwater contained in the pores is under normal hydrostatic load,
the pressure increasing with depth. Because these pressures exceed atmospheric pressure,
Table 4.1. Capillary rises and pressures in soils
Soil Capillary rise (mm) Capillary pressure (kPa)
Fine gravel Up to 100 Up to 1.0
Coarse sand 100–150 1.0–1.5
Medium sand 150–300 1.5–3.0
Fine sand 300–1000 3.0–10.0
Silt 1000–10,000 10.0–100.0
Clay Over 10,000 Over 100.0
156
Chapter 4
Table 4.2. Soil suction pressure and pF value
pF value (mm water) Equivalent suction (kPa)
0 10 0.1
1 100 1.0
2 1000 10.0
3 10,000 100.0
4 100,000 1,000.0
5 1,000,000 10,000.0
they are designated positive pressures. On the other hand, the pressures existing in the
capillary zone are less than atmospheric, and so are termed negative pressures. Therefore,
the water table usually is regarded as a datum of zero pressure between the positive pore
water pressure below and the negative above.
At each point where moisture menisci are in contact with soil particles, the forces of surface
tension are responsible for the development of capillary or suction pressure (Table 4.1). The
air and groundwater interfaces move into the smaller pores. In so doing, the radii of curvature
of the interfaces decrease, and the soil suction increases. Hence, the drier the soil, the higher
is the soil suction.
Soil suction is a negative pressure and indicates the height to which a column of water could
rise due to such suction. Since this height or pressure may be very large, a logarithmic scale
has been adopted to express the relationship between soil suction and moisture content; this
is referred to as the pF value (Table 4.2).
Soil suction tends to force soil particles together, and these compressive stresses contribute
towards the strength and stability of the soil. There is a particular suction pressure for a
particular moisture content in a given soil, the magnitude of which is governed by whether it
is becoming wetter or drier. In fact, as clay soil dries out, the soil suction may increase to
the order of several thousand kilopascals. However, the strength of a soil attributable to soil
suction is only temporary and is destroyed upon saturation. At that point, soil suction is zero.
Porosity and Permeability
Porosity and permeability are the two most important factors governing the accumulation,
migration and distribution of groundwater. However, both may change within a rock or soil mass
in the course of its geological evolution. Furthermore, it is not uncommon to find variations
in both porosity and permeability per metre of depth beneath the ground surface.
157
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Porosity
The porosity, n, of a rock can be defined as the percentage pore space within a given volume
and is expressed as follows:
n=(V /V) ¥ 100 (4.1)
v
where V is the volume of the voids and V is the total volume of the material concerned.
v
A closely related property is the void ratio, e, that is, the ratio of the volume of the voids to
the volume of the solids, V:
s
e=V /V (4.2)
v s
Where the ground is saturated, the void ratio can be derived from:
e=mG (4.3)
s
mbeing the moisture content and G the specific gravity. Both the porosity and the void ratio
s
indicate the relative proportion of void volume in the material, and the relationships between
the two are as follows:
n=e/(1 +e) (4.4)
and
e=n/(1 - n) (4.5)
Total or absolute porosity is a measure of the total void volume and is the excess of bulk
volume over grain volume per unit of bulk volume. It is usually determined as the excess
of grain density (i.e. specific gravity) over dry density per unit of grain density and can be
obtained from the following expression:
Ê Drydensity ˆ
Absoluteporosity=Á 1- ˜ ¥ 100
Ë Graindensiity¯
(4.6)
The effective, apparent or net porosity is a measure of the effective void volume of a porous
medium and is determined as the excess of bulk volume over grain volume and occluded
pore volume. It may be regarded as the pore space from which water can be removed.
Groundwater does not drain from occluded pores.
158
Chapter 4
The factors affecting the porosity of soil include particle size distribution, sorting, grain shape,
fabric, degree of compaction, solution effects and, lastly, mineralogical composition, particularly
the presence of clay particles (Bell, 1978). The highest porosity is attained when all the grains
are of the same size. The addition of grains of different sizes to such an assemblage lowers its
porosity and this, within certain limits, is directly proportional to the amount added. Irregularities
in grain shape result in a larger possible range of porosity, as irregular forms may theoretically
be packed either more tightly or more loosely than spheres. Similarly, angular grains may either
cause an increase or a decrease in porosity. After a sediment has been buried and indurated,
several additional factors help determine its porosity. The chief among these are closer spac-
ing of grains, deformation and granulation of grains, recrystallization, secondary growth of
minerals, cementation and, in some cases, dissolution. Hence, the diagenetic changes under-
gone by a sedimentary rock may either increase or decrease its original porosity.
The porosity can be determined experimentally by using either the standard saturation
method or an air porosimeter. Both tests give an effective value of porosity, although that
obtained by the air porosimeter may be somewhat higher because air can penetrate pores
more easily than can water.
The porosity of a deposit does not necessarily provide an indication of the amount of water
that can be obtained therefrom. Nevertheless, the water content of a soil or rock is related
to its porosity. The water content, m, of a porous material usually is expressed as the
percentage of the weight of the solid material, W, that is:
s
m=(W /W) ¥ 100, (4.7)
w s
where W is the weight of the water. The degree of saturation, S, refers to the relative volume
w r
of water, V , in the voids, V, and is expressed as a percentage:
w v
S =(V /V) ¥ 100 (4.8)
r w v
Specific Retention and Specific Yield
As far as supply is concerned, the capacity of a material to yield water is of greater impor-
tance than its capacity to hold water. Even though a rock or soil may be saturated, only a certain
proportion of water can be removed by drainage under gravity or pumping, the remainder
being held in place by capillary or molecular forces. The ratio of the volume of water retained,
V , to that of the total volume of rock or soil, V, expressed as a percentage, is referred to as
wr
the specific retention, S :
re
S =(V /V) ¥ 100 (4.9)
re wr
159
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 4.4
Relationship between grain size, porosity, specific retention and specific yield. Well-sorted material (— - —), average
material (——).
The amount of water retained varies directly in accordance with the surface area of the pores
and indirectly with regard to the pore space. The specific surface of a particle is governed by
its size and shape. For example, particles of clay have far larger specific surfaces than do
grains of sand. As an illustration, a grain of sand, 1 mm in diameter, has a specific surface of
about 0.002 m2g- 1, compared with kaolinite, which varies from approximately 10 to 20 m2g- 1.
Hence, clays have a much higher specific retention than sands (Fig. 4.4).
The specific yield, S, of a rock or soil mass refers to its water-yielding capacity, attributable
y
to gravity drainage as occurs when the water table declines. It is the ratio of the volume
of water, after saturation, that can be drained by gravity, V , to the total volume of the
wd
aquifer, expressed in percentage as:
S =(V /V) ¥ 100 (4.10)
y wd
The specific yield plus the specific retention is equal to the porosity of the material:
n=S +S , (4.11)
y re
when all the pores are interconnected. The relationship between the specific yield and
particle size distribution is shown in Figure 4.4. In soils, the specific yield tends to decrease
as the coefficient of uniformity increases. The coefficient of uniformity is the ratio between D
60
and D , where D and D are the sizes at which 60% and 10% of the particles are smaller,
10 60 10
respectively. Examples of the specific yield of some common types of soil and rock are
given in Table 4.3 (it must be appreciated that individual values of specific yield can vary from
those quoted).
160
Chapter 4
Table 4.3. Some examples of specific yield
Material Specific yield (%)
Gravel 15–30
Sand 10–30
Dune sand 25–35
Sand and gravel 15–25
Loess 15–20
Silt 5–10
Clay 1–5
Till (silty) 4–7
Till (sandy) 12–18
Sandstone 5–25
Limestone 0.5–10
Shale 0.5–5
Permeability
Permeability may be defined as the ability of soil or rock to allow the passage of fluids into or
through it without impairing its structure. In ordinary hydraulic usage, a substance is termed
permeable when it permits the passage of a measurable quantity of fluid in a finite period
of time, and impermeable when the rate at which it transmits that fluid is slow enough to be
negligible under existing temperature–pressure conditions (Table 4.4). The permeability
of a particular material is defined by its coefficient of permeability or hydraulic conductivity, k.
The transmissivity or flow in m3day- 1through a section of aquifer 1 m wide under a hydraulic
gradient of unity is sometimes used as a convenient quantity in the calculation of groundwater
flow instead of the coefficient of permeability. The transmissivity, T, and coefficient of
permeability, k, are related to each other as follows:
T=kH, (4.12)
where His the saturated thickness of the aquifer.
The flow through a unit cross section of material is modified by temperature, hydraulic
gradient and the coefficient of permeability. The latter is affected by the uniformity and
range of grain size, shape of the grains, stratification, the amount of consolidation and
cementation undergone, and the presence and nature of discontinuities. Temperature
changes affect the flow rate of a fluid by changing its viscosity. The rate of flow commonly
is assumed to be directly proportional to the hydraulic gradient but this is not always so
in practice.
161
162 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 4.4. Relative values of permeabilities
Permeability range (m s- 1) Type of
Porosity 100 10- 2 10- 4 10- 6 10- 8 10- 10 Well yields water-
Primary Secondary Very Very bearing
Rock types (grain)% (fracture)* High High Medium Low low Impermeable HighMediumLow unit
Sediments, unconsolidated
Gravel 30–40 ___________ _________ Aquifer
Coarse sand 30–40 ___________ ___________ Aquifer
Medium to fine sand 25–35 ___________ ____________ Aquifer
Silt 40–50 Occasional _________________ ____ Aquiclude
Clay, till 45–55 Often fissured _______________ ___ Aquiclude
Sediments, consolidated
Limestone, dolostone 1–50 Solution joints ___________________________________ _________________ Aquifer or
bedding planes aquiclude
Coarse, medium <20 Joints and ________________ ____________ Aquifer or
sandstone bedding planes aquiclude
Fine sandstone <10 Joints and _______________ ______ Aquifer or
bedding planes aquiclude
Shale, Siltstone – Joints and _______________ ___ Aquiclude or
bedding planes aquifer
Volcanic rocks, e.g. basalt – Joints and ___________________________________ _______________ Aquifer or
“bedding” planes aquiclude
Plutonic and Weathering and _________________ _______________ Aquiclude or
metamorphic rocks joints decreasing aquifer
as depth
increases
*Rarely exceeds 10%
Chapter 4
Permeability and porosity are not necessarily as closely related as would be expected.
For instance, very-fine-textured sandstones may have a higher porosity than coarser ones,
though the latter are more permeable.
As can be inferred from above, the permeability of a clastic material also is affected by
the interconnections between the pore spaces. If these are highly tortuous, then the
permeability is reduced accordingly. Consequently, tortuosity figures importantly in
permeability, influencing the extent and rate of free-water saturation. It can be defined as
the ratio of the total path covered by a liquid flowing in the pore channels between two given
points to the straight line distance between them. The sizes of the throat areas between pores
obviously are important.
Stratification in a formation varies within limits both vertically and horizontally. It frequently is
difficult to predict what effect stratification has on the permeability of the beds. Nevertheless,
in the great majority of cases where a directional difference in permeability exists, the greater
permeability is parallel to the bedding. Ratios of 5:1 are not uncommon in sandstones.
The permeability of intact rock (primary permeability) is usually several orders less than
in situ permeability (secondary permeability). Hence, as far as the assessment of flow
through rock masses is concerned, field tests provide more reliable results than can be
obtained from testing intact samples in the laboratory. Although secondary permeability is
affected by the frequency, continuity and openness, and amount of infilling of discontinuities,
a rough estimate of the permeability can be obtained from their frequency (Table 4.5).
Admittedly, such estimates must be treated with caution and cannot be applied to rocks that
are susceptible to solution.
Dykes often act as barriers to groundwater flow so that the water table on one side may be
higher than on the other. Fault planes occupied by clay gouge may have a similar effect.
Conversely, a fault plane may act as a conduit where it is not sealed.
Table 4.5. Estimation of secondary permeability from discontinuity frequency
Coefficient of
Permeability permeability
Term Interval (m) rock mass description k(m s- 1)
Very closely to extremely Less than 0.2 Highly permeable 10- 2–1
closely spaced discontinuities
Closely to moderately widely 0.2–0.6 Moderately permeable 10- 5–10- 2
spaced discontinuities
Widely to very widely 0.6–2.0 Slightly permeable 10- 9–10- 5
spaced discontinuities
No discontinuities Over 2.0 Effectively impermeable Less than 10- 9
163
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Storage Coefficient
The storage coefficient or storativity, S, of an aquifer has been defined as the volume of water
released from or taken into storage per unit surface area of the aquifer, per unit change
in head normal to that surface (Fig. 4.5). It is a dimensionless quantity. Changes in storage
in an unconfined aquifer represent the product of the volume of the aquifer, between the
water table before and after a given period of time, and the specific yield. Indeed, the
storage coefficient of an unconfined aquifer virtually corresponds to the specific yield as more
or less all the groundwater is released from storage by gravity drainage and only an
extremely small part results from compression of the aquifer and the expansion of water.
However, in confined aquifers, water is not yielded simply by gravity drainage from
the pore space because there is no falling water table and the material remains
saturated. Hence, other factors are involved regarding yield, such as consolidation
of the aquifer and expansion of groundwater consequent upon lowering of the
piezometric surface. Therefore, much less water is yielded by confined than unconfined
aquifers.
Figure 4.5
Diagram illustrating the storage coefficient of (a) an unconfined aquifer and (b) a confined aquifer.
164
Chapter 4
Flow through Soils and Rocks
Water possesses three forms of energy, namely, potential energy attributable to its height, pres-
sure energy owing to its pressure, and kinetic energy due to its velocity. The latter can usually
be discounted in any assessment of flow through soils. Energy in water usually is expressed
in terms of head. The head possessed by groundwater in soils or rocks is manifested by the
height to which it will rise in a standpipe above a given datum. This height usually is referred to
as the piezometric level and provides a measure of the total energy of the water. If at two differ-
ent points within a continuous area of groundwater, there are different amounts of energy, then
there will be a flow towards the point of lesser energy and the difference in head is expended in
maintaining that flow. Other things being equal, the velocity of flow between two points is directly
proportional to the difference in head between them. The hydraulic gradient, i, refers to the loss
of head or energy of water flowing through the ground. This loss of energy by the groundwater
is due to the friction resistance of the ground material, and this is greater in fine- than coarse-
grained soils. Thus, there is no guarantee that the rate of flow will be uniform, indeed this is
exceptional. However, if it is assumed that the resistance to flow is constant, then for a given
difference in head, the flow velocity is directly proportional to the flow path.
Darcy’s Law
Before any mathematical treatment of groundwater flow can be attempted, certain simplifying
assumptions have to be made, namely, that the material is isotropic and homogeneous, that there
is no capillary action and that a steady state of flow exists. Since rocks and soils are anisotropic
and heterogeneous, as they may be subject to capillary action and flow through them is charac-
teristically unsteady, any mathematical assessment of flow must be treated with caution.
The basic law concerned with flow is that enunciated by Darcy (1856), which states that the
rate of flow, v, per unit area is proportional to the gradient of the potential head, i, measured
in the direction of flow, kbeing the coefficient of permeability:
v=ki (4.13)
and for a particular rock or soil or part of it of area A:
Q=vA=Aki (4.14)
where Q is the quantity in a given time. The ratio of the cross-sectional area of the pore
spaces in a soil to that of the whole soil is given by e/(1 +e), where eis the void ratio. Hence,
a truer velocity of flow, that is, the seepage velocity, v, is
s
v =[(1 +e)/e]ki (4.15)
s
165
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Darcy’s law is valid as long as a laminar flow exists. Departures from Darcy’s law therefore
occur when the flow is turbulent, such as when the velocity of flow is high. Such conditions
exist in very permeable media. Accordingly, it usually is accepted that this law can be applied
to those soils that have finer textures than gravels. Furthermore, Darcy’s law probably
does not accurately represent the flow of water through a porous medium of extremely low
permeability because of the influence of surface and ionic phenomena, and the presence
of any gases.
Apart from an increase in the mean velocity, the other factors that cause deviations from the
linear laws of flow include the non-uniformity of pore spaces, since differing porosity gives rise
to differences in the seepage rates through pore channels. A second factor is the absence of a
running-in section where the velocity profile can establish a steady state parabolic distribution.
Lastly, such deviations may be developed by perturbations due to jet separation from wall
irregularities.
Darcy failed to recognize that permeability also depends on the density, r, and dynamic
viscosity of the fluid involved, m, and the average size, D , and shape of the pores in a porous
n
medium. In fact, permeability is directly proportional to the unit weight of the fluid concerned
and is inversely proportional to its viscosity. The latter is influenced very much by temperature.
The following expression attempts to take these factors into account:
k=CD2r/m (4.16)
n
where Cis a dimensionless constant or shape factor that takes note of the effects of stratifi-
cation, packing, particle size distribution and porosity. It is assumed in this expression that
both the porous medium and the water are mechanically and physically stable, but this may
never be true. For example, ionic exchange on clay and colloid surfaces may bring about
changes in mineral volume that, in turn, affect the shape and size of the pores. Moderate to
high groundwater velocities tend to move colloids and clay particles. Solution and deposition
may result from the pore fluids. Small changes in temperature and/or pressure may cause
gas to come out of solution that may block pore spaces.
The Kozeny–Carmen equation for deriving the coefficient of permeability also takes the
porosity, n, into account as well as the specific surface area of the porous medium, S , that
a
is defined per unit volume of solid
n3
k =C o(
1-
n)2
S2
(4.17)
a
where C is a coefficient, the suggested value of which is 0.2.
o
166
Chapter 4
General Equation of Flow
When considering the general case of flow in porous media, it is assumed that the media is
isotropic and homogeneous as far as permeability is concerned. If an element of saturated
material is taken, with the dimensions dx, dyand dz(Fig. 4.6), and flow is taking place in the
x–yplane, then the generalized form of Darcy’s Law is:
v =ki (4.18)
x xx
Ê dhˆ
v = k Á ˜ (4.19)
x xË d x¯
and
v =ki (4.20)
y yy
Ê dhˆ
v = k Á ˜ (4.21)
y yË d y¯
where his the total head under steady state conditions and k, i and k, i are, respectively, the
x x y y
coefficients of permeability and the hydraulic gradients in the x and y directions. Assuming that
the fabric of the medium does not change and that the water is incompressible, the volume
of water entering the element is the same as that leaving in any given time, hence:
Ê dv ˆ Ê d v ˆ
v dydz +v dxdz = Á v + xdx˜ dydz + Á v + ydy˜ dxdz (4.22)
x y Ë x d x ¯ Ë y d y ¯
Figure 4.6
Seepage through an element of soil.
167
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
In such a situation, the difference in volume between the water entering and leaving the
element is zero; therefore:
d v d v
d
xx +
d
yy =0
(4.23)
Equation 4.23 is referred to as the flow continuity equation. If Eqs. 4.19 and 4.21 are substituted
in the continuity equation, then:
Ê d 2hˆ Ê d 2hˆ
k Á ˜ + k Á ˜ = 0 (4.24)
xË d x2¯ yË d y2¯
If there is a recharge or discharge to the aquifer (- w and +w, respectively), then this term must
be added to the right-hand side of Eq. 4.24. If it is assumed that the coefficient of permeability
is isotropic throughout the media so that k =k, then Eq. 4.24 becomes:
x y
d 2h d 2h
+ = 0 (4.25)
d x2 d y2
This is the two-dimensional Laplace equation for steady state flow in an isotropic porous
medium. The partial differential equation governing the two-dimensional unsteady flow of water
in an anisotropic aquifer can be written as:
d 2h d 2h dh
T = +T =S (4.26)
x d x2 yd y2 d t
where Tand Sare the coefficients of transmissivity and storage, respectively.
Flow through Stratified Deposits
In a stratified sequence of deposits, the individual beds, no doubt, will have different perme-
abilities, so that vertical permeability will differ from horizontal permeability. Consequently,
in such situations, it may be necessary to determine the average values of the coefficient
of permeability normal to, k, and parallel to, k , the bedding. If the total thickness of the
v h
sequence is H and the thickness of the individual layers are H , H , H , ..., H , with the
T 1 2 3 n
corresponding values of the coefficient of permeability k , k , k , ..., k , then k and k can be
1 2 3 n v h
obtained as follows:
H
k v = H /k + H /k + HT /k +◊◊◊+H /k (4.27)
1 1 2 2 3 3 n n
168
Chapter 4
and
H /k +H /k +H /k +◊◊◊+H /k
k = 1 1 2 2 3 3 n n (4.28)
h H
T
Fissure Flow
Generally, it is the interconnected systems of discontinuities that determine the permeablility
of a particular rock mass. Indeed, the permeability of a jointed rock mass is usually several
orders higher than that of intact rock. According to Serafim (1968), the following expression can
be used to derive the filtration through a rock mass intersected by a system of parallel-sided
joints with a given opening, e, separated by a given distance, d:
e3g
k = 12dw m (4.29)
where g is the unit weight of water and mits viscosity. The velocity of flow, v, through a single
w
joint of constant gap, e, is expressed by:
Ê e2g ˆ
v =Á w˜ i (4.30)
Ë 12m ¯
where iis the hydraulic gradient.
Pore Pressures, Total Pressures and Effective Pressures
Subsurface water is normally under pressure, which increases with increasing depth below
the water table to very high values. Such water pressures have a significant influence on the
engineering behaviour of soil masses, and their variations are responsible for changes in the
stresses in these masses, which affect their deformation characteristics and failure.
The efficiency of a soil in supporting a structure is influenced by the effective or intergranular
pressure, that is, the pressure between the particles of the soil that develops resistance
to applied load. Because the moisture in the pores offers no resistance to shear, it is neutral
and therefore pore water pressure also has been referred to as neutral pressure. Since the
pore water or neutral pressure plus the effective pressure equals the total pressure, reduction
inpore water pressure increases the effective pressure. Reduction of the pore water pressure
by drainage consequently affords better conditions for carrying a proposed structure.
169
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 4.7
Pressure diagrams to illustrate the influence of lowering the water table on effective pressure: (a) the water tabel is just below
the ground surface, (b) the water table has been lowered into the sand and the effective pressure, s¢, is increased accordingly.
In the clay, the effective pressure and total pressure, s, are the same.
The effective pressure at a particular depth is obtained by multiplying the unit weight of the
soil by the depth in question and subtracting the pore water pressure for that depth. In a
layered sequence, the individual layers may have different unit weights. The unit weight of
each layer should be multiplied by its thickness, and the involved pore water pressure should
be subtracted. The effective pressure for the total thickness involved is obtained by summing
the effective pressures of the individual layers (Fig. 4.7). Water held in the capillary fringe
by soil suction does not affect the values of pore pressure below the water table. However,
the weight of water held in the capillary fringe does increase the weight of overburden and
so the effective pressure.
Piezometers are installed in the ground in order to monitor and obtain measurements of pore
water pressures (Fig. 4.8). Observations should be made regularly so that changes due to
external factors such as excessive precipitation, tides, the seasons, etc., are noted, it being
important to record the maximum pressures that have occurred. Standpipe piezometers allow
the determination of the position of the water table and the permeability. For example, the
water level can be measured with an electric dipmeter. Piezometer tips that have leads
going to a constant head permeability unit, enable the rate of flow through the tip to
170
Chapter 4
Figure 4.8
Standard piezometers: (a) a borehole standpipe piezometer and (b) a drive-in standpipe piezometer.
be measured. Hydraulic piezometers can be installed at various depths in a borehole where
it is required to determine water pressures. They are connected to a manometer board that
records the changes in pore water pressure. Usually, simpler types of piezometer are used
in the more permeable soils. When a piezometer is installed in a borehole, it should be
surrounded with a filter of clean sand. The sand should be sealed both above and below
the piezometer to enable the pore water pressures at that particular level to be measured.
The response to piezometers in rock masses can be influenced very much by the incidence
171
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
and geometry of the discontinuities, therefore, the original values of water pressure obtained
may be misleading if due regard is not given to these structures.
Critical Hydraulic Gradient, Quick Conditions and Hydraulic Uplift Phenomena
As water flows through the soil and loses head, its energy is transferred to the particles past
which it is moving, which in turn creates a drag effect on the particles. If the drag effect is
in the same direction as the force of gravity, then the effective pressure is increased and
the soil is stable. Indeed, the soil tends to become more dense. Conversely, if water flows
towards the surface, then the drag effect counters gravity, thereby reducing the effective
pressure between particles. If the velocity of upward flow is sufficient, it can buoy up the
particles so that the effective pressure is reduced to zero. This represents a critical condition
in which the weight of the submerged soil is balanced by the upward-acting seepage force.
The critical hydraulic gradient, i,can be calculated from the following expression:
c
G - 1
i = s , (4.31)
c 1+ e
where G is the specific gravity of the particles and e is the void ratio. A critical condition
s
sometimes occurs in silts or fine sands. If the upward velocity of flow increases beyond the
critical hydraulic gradient, a quick condition develops.
Quicksands, if subjected to deformation or disturbance, can undergo a spontaneous loss
of strength. This loss of strength causes them to flow like viscous liquids. For quicksand
to develop, the sand or silt concerned must be saturated and loosely packed. Then, on
disturbance, the constituent grains become more closely packed, thereby increasing the pore
water pressure, which reduces the forces acting between the grains. This brings about
a reduction in strength. If the pore water can escape very rapidly, the loss in strength is
momentary. Hence, a quick condition requires that pore water does not readily escape. This
is fulfilled if the sand/silt has a low permeability and/or the seepage path is long. Casagrande
(1936) demonstrated that a critical porosity existed, above which a quick condition could be
developed. He maintained that many coarse-grained sands, even when loosely packed, have
porosities approximately equal to the critical condition,whereas medium- and fine-grained
sands, especially if uniformly graded, exist well above the critical porosity when loosely
packed. Accordingly, fine sands tend to be potentially more unstable than coarse-grained
varieties, and finer sands also have lower permeabilities.
Quick conditions brought about by seepage forces are frequently encountered in excavations
made in fine sands that are below the water table, for example, as in cofferdam work. As the
172
Chapter 4
velocity of the upward seepage force increases as the critical gradient is exceeded, the soil
begins to boil more and more violently. Structures then fail by sinking into the quicksand.
Liquefaction of potential quicksand may be caused by sudden shocks such as the action of
heavy machinery (notably pile driving), blasting and earthquakes. Such shocks increase the
stress carried by the pore water, the neutral stress, and give rise to a decrease in the effec-
tive stress and shear strength of the soil. A quick condition can also develop in a layered soil
sequence where the individual beds have different permeabilities.
Piping refers to erosive action where sediments are removed by seepage forces, hence form-
ing subsurface cavities and tunnels. For erosion tunnels to form, the soil must have some
cohesion; the greater the cohesion, the wider the tunnel. In fact, fine sands and silts, espe-
cially those with dispersive characteristics, are most susceptible to piping failures. Obviously,
the danger of piping occurs when the hydraulic gradient is high, that is, when there is a rapid
loss of head over a short distance. For example, it has been associated with earth dams.
As the pipe develops by backward erosion through a dam, it nears the source of water supply
(i.e. the reservoir) so that eventually the water breaks into and rushes through the pipe
(Fig. 5.8). Ultimately, the hole so produced collapses from lack of support.
Hydraulic uplift phenomena are associated with artesian conditions, that is, when water
flowing under pressure through the ground is confined between two impermeable horizons
(see the previous text). This can cause serious trouble in excavations, and both the position
of the water table and the piezometric pressures should be determined before work
commences. Otherwise, excavations that extend close to strata under artesian pressure may
heave or, worse, may be severely damaged due to blow-outs taking place in the floors.
Slopes also may fail. Indeed, such sites may have to be abandoned.
Groundwater Exploration
Groundwater investigation requires a thorough appreciation of the hydrology and geology
of the area concerned, and a groundwater inventry needs to determine possible gains and
losses affecting the subsurface reservoir. Of particular interest is the information concerning
the lithology, stratigraphical sequence and geological structure, as well as the hydrogeological
characteristics of the subsurface materials. Also of importance are the positions of the water
table and piezometric level, and their fluctuations.
In major groundwater investigations, records of precipitation, temperatures, wind movement,
evaporation and humidity may provide essential or useful supplementary information.
Similarly, data relating to steamflow may be of value in helping to solve the groundwater
equation since seepage into or from streams constitutes a major factor in the discharge
173
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
or recharge of groundwater. The chemical and bacterial qualities of groundwater obviously
require investigation.
Essentially, an assessment of groundwater resources involves the location of potential
aquifers within economic drilling depths. Whether or not an aquifer will be able to supply the
required amount of water depends on its thickness and spatial distribution, its porosity and
permeability, whether it is fully or partially saturated and whether or not the quality of the
water is acceptable. Another factor that has to be considered is pumping lift and the effect
of drawdown on it.
The desk study involves a consideration of the hydrological, geological, hydrogeological and
geophysical data available concerning the area in question. Particular attention should be
given to assessing the lateral and vertical extent of any potential aquifers, to their continuity
and structure, to any possible variations in formation characteristics and to possible areas
of recharge and discharge. Additional information, relating to groundwater chemistry, the
outflow of springs, surface run-off and data from pumping tests, from mine workings, from
waterworks or meteorological data, should be considered. Information on vegetative cover,
land utilization, topography and drainage pattern can prove of value at times.
Aerial photographs may aid recognition of broad rock and soil types and, thereby, help
locate potential aquifers. The combination of topographical and geological data may
help identify areas of likely groundwater recharge and discharge. In particular, the
nature and extent of superficial deposits may provide some indication of the distribution
of areas of recharge and discharge. Aerial photographs allow the occurrence of springs
to be recorded.
Variations in water content in soils and rocks that may not be readily apparent on black
and white photographs often are depicted by false colour. In fact, the specific heat of water
is usually two to ten times greater than that of most rocks, and this, therefore, facilitates its
detection in the ground. Indeed, the specific heat of water can cause an aquifer to act as
a heat sink that, in turn, influences near-surface temperatures.
Also, the vegetative cover may be identifiable from aerial photographs and, as such, may
provide some clue as to the occurrence of groundwater. In arid and semi-arid regions, in
particular, the presence of phreatophytes, that is, plants that have a high transpiration capacity
and derive water directly from the water table, indicates that the water table is near the surface.
By contrast, xerophytes can exist at low moisture contents in soil, and their presence would
suggest that the water table is at an appreciable depth. As a consequence, groundwater
prediction maps sometimes can be made from aerial photographs. These can be used to help
locate the sites of test wells.
174
Chapter 4
Geological mapping frequently forms the initial phase of exploration and should identify
potential aquifers such as sandstones and limestones, and distinguish them from aquicludes.
Superficial deposits may perform a confining function in relation to any major aquifers they
overlie, or because of their lithology, they may play an important role in controlling recharge
to major aquifers. Furthermore, geological mapping should locate igneous intrusions
and major faults. Obviously, it is important during the mapping programme to establish the
geological structure.
Direct subsurface exploration techniques are dealt with in Chapter 7.
Geophysical Methods and Groundwater Investigation
As far as seismic methods are concerned, velocities in crystalline rocks are generally high to
very high (Table 7.4). Velocities in sedimentary rocks increase concomitantly with consolida-
tion and with increase in the degree of cementation and diagenesis. Unconsolidated sedi-
mentary accumulations have maximum velocities varying as a function of the mineralogy, the
volume of voids (either air-filled or water-filled) and grain size.
Porosity tends to lower the velocity of shock waves through a material. Indeed, the compres-
sional wave velocity, V , is related to the porosity, n, of a normally consolidated sediment
p
as follows:
1 n 1- n
= +
(4.32)
V V V
p pf pl
where V is the velocity in the pore fluid and V is the compressional wave velocity for the
pf pl
intact material as determined in the laboratory. The compressional wave velocities may be
raised appreciably by the presence of water.
The resistivity method does not provide satisfactory quantitative results if the potential
aquifers being surveyed are thin, that is, 6 m or less in thickness, especially if they are
separated by thick argillaceous horizons. In such situations, either cumulative effects are
obtained or anomalous resistivities are measured, the interpretation of which is extremely
difficult, if not impossible. In addition, the resistivity method is more successful when used
to investigate a formation that is thicker than the one above it.
Most rocks and soils conduct electric current only because they contain water. But the widely
differing resistivity of the various types of pore water can cause variations in the resistivity of soil
and rock formations, ranging from a few tenths of an ohm-metre to hundreds of ohm-metres.
175
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Moreover, the resistivity of water changes markedly with temperature, and temperature
increases with depth. Hence, for each bed under investigation, the temperature of both rock and
water must be determined or closely estimated, and the calculated resistivity of the pore water
at that temperature should be converted to its value at a standard temperature (i.e. 25∞C).
As the amount of water present in a rock is influenced by the porosity, the resistivity provides
a measure of its porosity. For example, in granular materials in which there are no clay
minerals, the relationship between the resistivity, r, on the one hand and the density of the
pore water, r , the porosity, n, and the degree of saturation, S, on the other, is as follows:
w r
r=ar n-xS-y (4.33)
w r
where a, xand yare variables (xranges from 1.0 for sand to 2.5 for sandstone and yis approx-
imately 2.0 when the degree of saturation is greater than 30%). If clay minerals do occur
in sands or sandstones, then the resistivity of the pore water is reduced by ion exchange with
the clay minerals so that this relationship becomes invalid. For those formations that occur
below the water table and therefore are saturated, the above expression becomes:
r=ar n-x (4.34)
w
since S =1 (i.e. 100%).
r
Generally speaking, magnetic and gravity methods are not used in groundwater exploration,
except to derive a regional picture of the subsurface geology. They are referred to in Chapter 7,
as is the geophysical logging of drillholes.
Maps
Isopachyte maps can be drawn to show the thickness of a particular aquifer and the depth
below the surface of a particular bed. They can be used to estimate the positions
and depths of drillholes. They also provide an indication of the distribution of potential
aquifers.
Maps showing groundwater contours are compiled when there are a sufficient number of
observation wells to determine the configuration of the water table (Fig. 4.3). Data on surface
water levels in reservoirs and streams that have free connection with the water table also
should be used in the production of such maps. These maps usually are compiled for the
periods of the maximum, minimum and mean annual positions of the water table. A water
table contour map is most useful for studies of unconfined groundwater.
176
Chapter 4
As groundwater moves from areas of higher potential towards areas of lower potential and
as the contours on groundwater contour maps represent lines of equal potential, the direc-
tion of groundwater flow moves from highs to lows at right angles to the contours. Analysis
of conditions revealed by groundwater contours is made in accordance with Darcy’s law.
Accordingly, spacing of contours is dependent on the flow rate, and on aquifer thickness and
permeability. If continuity of flow rate is assumed, then the spacing depends on aquifer thick-
ness and permeability. Hence, areal changes in contour spacing may be indicative of
changes in aquifer conditions. However, because of the heterogeneity of most aquifers,
changes in gradient must be carefully interpreted in relation to all factors. The shape of the
contours portraying the position of the water table helps to indicate where areas of recharge
and discharge of groundwater occur. Groundwater mounds can result from the downward
seepage of surface water. In an ideal situation, the gradient from the centre of such a recharge
area decreases radially and at a declining rate. An impermeable boundary or changein trans-
missivity will affect this pattern.
Depth to water table maps show the depth to water from the ground surface. They are
prepared by overlaying a water table contour map on a topographical map of the same area
and scale, and recording the values at the points where the two types of contours intersect.
Depth to water contours are then interpolated in relation to these points. A map indicating the
depth to the water table also can provide an indication of areas of recharge and discharge.
Both are most likely to occur where the water table approaches the surface.
Water-level-change maps are constructed by plotting the change in the position of the
water table recorded at wells during a given interval of time. The effects of local recharge
or discharge often appear as distinct anomalies on water-level-change maps. For example,
a water-level-change map may indicate that the groundwater levels beneath a river have
remained constant while falling everywhere else. This would suggest an influent relationship
between the river and aquifer. Hence, such maps can help identify the locations where there
are interconnections between surface water and groundwater. These maps also permit an
estimation to be made of the change in groundwater storage that has occurred during the
lapse in time involved.
Assessment of Field Permeability
An initial assessment of the magnitude and variability of the in situ permeability can be
obtained from tests carried out in boreholes as the hole is advanced. By artificially raising the
level of water in the borehole (falling head test) above that in the surrounding ground, the flow
rate from the borehole can be measured. However, in very permeable soils, it may not be
possible to raise the level of water in the borehole. Conversely, the water level in the borehole
177
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
can be artificially depressed (rising head test), thereby allowing the rate of water flow into the
borehole to be assessed. Wherever possible, rising and falling head tests should be carried
out at each required level, and the results averaged.
In rising or falling head tests in which the piezometric head varies with time, the permeability
is determined from the expression:
A Ê h ˆ
k = ( )lnÁ 1˜ (4.35)
F t - t Ë h ¯
2 1 2
where h and h are the piezometric heads at times t and t , respectively, A is the inner
1 2 1 2
cross-sectional area of the casing in the borehole and Fis an intake or shape factor. Where
a borehole of diameter D is open at the base and cased throughout its depth, F = 2.75 D.
If the casing extends throughout the permeable bed to an impermeable contact, then F=2D.
The constant head method of in situ permeability testing is used when the rise or fall in the
level of the water is too rapid for accurate recording (i.e. occurs in less than 5 min). This test
normally is conducted as an inflow test in which the flow of water into the ground is kept under
a sensibly constant head (e.g. by adjusting the rate of flow into the borehole so as to main-
tain the water level at a mark on the inside of the casing near the top). The method only is
applicable to permeable ground such as gravels, sands and broken rock, when there is a
negligible or zero time for equalization. The rate of flow, Q, is measured once a steady flow into
and out of the borehole has been attained over a period of some 10 min. The permeability,
k, is derived from the following expression:
k=Q/Fh (4.36)
c
where Fis the intake factor and h is the applied constant head.
c
The permeability of an individual bed of rock can be determined by a water injection or packer
test carried out in a drillhole. This is done by sealing off a length of uncased hole with pack-
ers and injecting water under pressure into the test section (Fig. 4.9). Usually, because it is
more convenient, packer tests are carried out after the entire length of a hole has been
drilled. Two packers are used to seal off selected test lengths, and the tests are performed
from the base of the hole upwards. The hole must be flushed to remove sediment prior to
a test being performed. With double packer testing, the variation in permeability throughout
the test hole is determined. The rate of flow of water over the test length is measured under
a range of constant pressures and recorded. The permeability is calculated from a flow–pressure
curve. Water generally is pumped into the test section at steady pressures for periods of
178
Chapter 4
Figure 4.9
Drillhole packer test equipment. In the double packer test, the zone of rock to be tested in the drillhole is isolated by using two
packers that seal off the drillhole, the water being pumped into the space between the packers. An alternative method that can
be carried out as drilling proceeds is to use a single packer for testing the zone between the bottom of the packer and the base
of the drillhole. The average flow under equilibrium conditions is obtained from a metered water supply, acting under a known
pressure and gravity head.
15 min, readings of water absorption being taken every 15 min. The test usually consists
of five cycles at successive pressures of 6, 12, 18, 12 and 6 kPa for every metre depth of
packer below the surface. The evaluation of the “permeability” from packer tests is normally
based upon methods that use a relationship of the form:
Q
k = , (4.37)
Crh
s
179
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
where Qis the steady flow rate under an effective applied head, h(corrected for friction losses),
ris the radius of the drillhole and C is a constant depending upon the length and diameter
s
of the test section.
Field pumping tests allow the determination of the coefficients of permeability and storage
as well as the transmissivity of a larger mass of ground than the aforementioned tests.
A pumping test involves abstracting water from a well at known discharge rates and
observing the resulting water levels as drawdown occurs. At the same time, the behaviour
of the water table in the aquifer can be recorded in observation wells radially arranged
about the abstraction well. There are two types of pumping tests, namely, the constant-
pumping-rate aquifer test and the step performance test. In the former test, the rate of
discharge is constant, whereas in a step performance test, there are a number of stages,
each of equal length of time, but at different rates of discharge. The step performance test
usually is carried out before the constant-pumping-rate aquifer test. Yield drawdown
graphs are plotted from the information obtained (Fig. 4.10). The hydraulic efficiency of the
well is indicated by the nature of the curves, the more vertical and straighter they are, the
more efficient the well.
Assessment of Flow in the Field
Flowmeters
A flowmeter log provides a record of the direction and velocity of groundwater movement
in a drillhole. Flowmeter logging requires the use of a velocity-sensitive instrument, a system
for lowering the instrument into the hole, a depth-measuring device to determine the position
of the flowmeter and a recorder located at the surface.
The direction of flow of water is determined by slowly lowering and raising the flowmeter
through a section of hole 6 to 9 m in length, and recording velocity measurements during both
traverses. If the velocity measured is greater during the downward than the upward traverse,
then the direction of flow is upward and vice versa.
A flowmeter log, made while a drillhole is being pumped at a moderate rate or by allowing
water to flow if there is sufficient artesian head, permits identification of the zones
contributing to the discharge. It also provides information on the thickness of these zones
and the relative yield at that discharge rate. Because the yield varies approximately directly
with the drawdown of water level in a well, flowmeter logs made by pumping should be
pumped at least at three different rates. The drawdown of water level should be recorded
for each rate.
180
Chapter 4
Figure 4.10
Yield drawdown curves from pumping tests.
Tracers
A number of different types of tracer have been used to investigate the movement of ground-
water and the interconnection between surface and groundwater resources. The ideal tracer
should be easy to detect quantitatively in minute concentrations. It should not change the
hydraulic characteristics of, or be adsorbed by, the media through which it is flowing; it should
be more or less absent from, and should not react with, the groundwater concerned and it
should have low toxicity. The type of tracers in use include water-soluble dyes that can be
detected by colorimetry, sodium chloride or sulphate salts that can be detected chemically
and strong electrolytes that can be detected by electrical conductivity. Radioactive tracers
also are used, and one of their advantages is that they can be detected in minute quantities
in water. Such tracers should have a useful half-life and should present a minimum of hazard.
For example, tritium is not the best of tracers because of its relatively long half-life. In addition,
181
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
because it is introduced as tritiated water, it is adsorbed preferentially by any montmorillonite
present.
When a tracer is injected via a drillhole into groundwater, it is subject to diffusion, dispersion,
dilution and adsorption. Dispersion is the result of very small variations in the velocity of laminar
flow through porous media. Molecular diffusion is negligible, unless the velocity of flow is
unusually low. Even if these processes are not significant, flow through an aquifer may be
stratified or concentrated along discontinuities. Therefore, a tracer may remain undetected
unless the observation drillholes intersect these discontinuities.
The vertical velocity of water movement in a drillhole can be assessed by using tracers.
A tracer is injected at the required depth, and the direction and rate of movement is monitored
by a probe.
Determination of the permeability in the field can be done by measuring the time it takes
for a tracer to move between two test holes. As with pumping tests, this tracer technique
is based on the assumption that the aquifer is homogeneous and that observations taken
radially at the same distance from the well are comparable. This method of assessing
permeability requires that injection and observation wells be close together (to avoid exces-
sive travel time) and that the direction of flow be known so that observation holes are
correctly sited.
Flow Nets
Flow nets provide a graphical representation of the flow of water through the ground and
indicate the loss of head involved (Fig. 4.11). They also provide data relating to the changes
in head velocity and effective pressure that occur in a foundation subjected to flowing ground-
water conditions. For example, where the flow lines of a flow net move closer together, this
indicates that the flow increases, although their principal function is to indicate the direction
of flow. The equipotential lines indicate equal losses in head or energy as the water flows
through the ground, so that the closer they are, the more rapid is the loss in head. Hence,
a flow net can provide quantitative data related to the flow problem in question, for example,
seepage pressures can be determined at individual points within the net.
By using a flow net, it is possible to estimate the amount of water flowing through the soil.
If the total loss of head and the permeability of the soil are known, then the quantity of water
involved can be calculated by using Darcy’s law. However, it is not really as simple as that,
because the area through which the water flows usually varies, as does the hydraulic gradient,
since the flow paths vary in length. By using the total number of flow paths, f, the total number
182
Chapter 4
Figure 4.11
Flow net beneath a concrete gravity dam with cut-off at the heal, showing 17 equipotential drops and four flow channels.
of equipotential drops, d, and the total loss of head, i, together with the permeability, k, in the
t
following expression:
Q =ki(f/d) (4.38)
t
the quantity of water flow, Q, can be estimated.
Groundwater Quality
The quality must be considered in any assessment of groundwater resources (Anon, 1993).
A study is required of changes in groundwater quality from outcrop areas to those where the
aquifer is confined and also of changes that occur vertically within an aquifer. The chemical
and biological characteristics of groundwater determine whether or not it can be used
for domestic, industrial or agricultural supply. However, the number of major dissolved
constituents in groundwater is quite limited, and the natural variations are not as great as
might be expected. Nevertheless, groundwater is a complex chemical substance that owes
its composition mainly to the solution of soluble constituents in, and chemical reactions
between, the water and the rock or soil masses through which it travels (Table 4.6). Of critical
importance in this context is the residence time of the groundwater, since this determines
183
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 4.6. Chemical analysis of representative groundwaters
Bourne, Summerfield, Thornton,
Location Gravesend Watford Lincs. Great Worcs. Sherwood Northumberland
Aquifer Chalk Chalk Oolite Sandstone Fell Sandstone
Ca 280 115 135 40 60
Mg 31 5 9 12 60
Na 2750 18
K 98 15 4 8
CO 153 147 138 56
3
SO 700 39 150 26 38
4
Cl 5000 20 24 19 22
NO 35 ND 2 30
3
TDS 9370 384 491 213 ND
CH 255 245 230 93 ND
N-CH 1755 64 145 97 ND
Note: TDS =total dissolved solids; CH =carbonate hardness; N-CH =non-carbonate hardness;
ND not determined. Classification of TDS (mg l-1): fresh =less than 1000; slightly saline =1000 to 3000;
moderately saline =3000 to 10,000; very saline =10,000 to 35,000; briny =over 35,000. Classification
of hardness (mg l-1as CaCO): soft =under 60; moderately hard =60–120; hard =120–180;
3
very hard =over 180.
whether there is sufficient time for dissolution of minerals to proceed to the point where the
solution is in equilibrium with the reaction. Residence time depends on the rate of groundwater
movement, and this usually is very slow beneath the water table. As the character of ground-
water in an aquifer frequently changes with depth, it is possible at times to recognize zones
of different qualities of groundwater (Elliot et al., 2001).
The solution of carbonates, especially calcium and magnesium carbonate, is principally due
to the formation of weak carbonic acid in the soil horizons where CO is dissolved by soil
2
water. Calcium in sedimentary rocks is derived from calcite, aragonite, dolomite, anhydrite
and gypsum. In igneous and metamorphic rocks, calcium is supplied by the feldspars, pyrox-
enes, amphiboles and the less common minerals such as apatite and wollastonite. Because
of its abundance, calcium is one of the most common ions in groundwater. Bicarbonate is
formed when calcium carbonate is attacked by carbonic acid. Calcium carbonate and bicar-
bonate are the dominant constituents found in the zone of active circulation and for some
distance under the cover of younger strata. The normal concentration of calcium in groundwater
ranges from 10 to 100 mg l- 1. Such concentrations have no effect on health, and it has been
suggested that as much as 1000 mg l- 1may be harmless (Edmunds and Smedley, 1996).
Magnesium, sodium and potassium are less common cations, and sulphate, chloride and
nitrate (to some extent) are less common anions, although the latter may be present in
significant concentrations in some groundwaters. Dolomite is the common source of magnesium
184
Chapter 4
in sedimentary rocks. The rarer evaporite minerals such as epsomite, kierserite, kainite and
carnallite are not significant contributors. Olivine, biotite, hornblende and augite are among
those minerals that make significant contributions in the igneous rocks, and serpentine, talc,
diopside and tremolite are among the metamorphic contributors. Despite the higher solubilities
of most of its compounds (magnesium sulphate and magnesium chloride are both very soluble),
magnesium usually occurs in lesser concentrations in groundwaters than calcium. Common
concentrations of magnesium range from about 1 to 40 mg l- 1, concentrations above 100 mg l- 1
are rarely encountered.
Sodium does not occur as an essential constituent of many of the principal rock-forming
minerals, plagioclase feldspar being the exception. Consequently, plagioclase is the primary
source of most sodium in groundwater. Obviously, in areas of evaporitic deposits, halite
is important. Sodium salts are highly soluble and do not precipitate unless concentrations
of several thousand parts per million are reached. The only common mechanism for removal
of large amounts of sodium ions from groundwater is through ion exchange that operates
if the sodium ions are in great abundance. The conversion of calcium bicarbonate to sodium
bicarbonate, no doubt, accounts for the removal of some sodium ions from sea water that has
invaded freshwater aquifers. This process is reversible. All groundwaters contain measurable
amounts of sodium, up to 20 mg l- 1 being the most common concentrations.
Common sources of potassium are the feldspars and micas of the igneous and metamorphic
rocks. Potash minerals such as sylvite occur in some evaporitic sequences, but their contri-
bution is not important. Although the abundance of potassium in the Earth’s crust is similar
to that of sodium, its concentration in groundwater is usually less than a tenth that of sodium.
Most groundwater contains less than 10 mg l- 1. As with sodium, potassium is highly soluble
and therefore is not easily removed from groundwater except by ion exchange.
Sedimentary rocks such as shales and clays may contain pyrite or marcasite, from which
sulphur can be derived. However, most sulphate ions probably are derived from the solution
of calcium and magnesium sulphate minerals found in evaporitic sequences, gypsum and
anhydrite being the most common. The concentration of the sulphate ion in groundwater can
be affected by sulphate-reducing bacteria. The products of sulphate reduction are hydrogen
sulphide and carbon dioxide. Hence, a decline in the sulphate ion frequently is associated
with an increase in the bicarbonate ion. Concentration of sulphate in groundwater is usually
less than 100 mg l- 1and may be less than 1 mg l- 1if sulphate-reducing bacteria are active.
The chloride content of groundwater may be due to the presence of soluble chlorides from
rocks, saline intrusion, connate and juvenile waters or contamination by industrial effluent
or domestic sewage. In the zone of circulation, the chloride ion concentration normally is
relatively small. Chloride is a minor constituent in the Earth’s crust; sodalite and apatite are
185
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
the only igneous and metamorphic minerals containing chlorite as an essential constituent.
Halite is one of the principal mineral sources. As in the case of sulphate, the atmosphere
probably makes a significant contribution to the chloride content of surface waters. These,
in turn, contribute to the groundwater. Usually, the concentration of chloride in groundwater
is less than 30 mg l- 1, but concentrations of 1000 mg l- 1or more are common in arid regions.
Nitrate ions are generally derived from the oxidation of organic matter with a high protein
content. Their presence may be indicative of a source of pollution, and their occurrence usu-
ally is associated with shallow groundwater sources. Concentrations in fresh water generally
do not exceed 5 mg l- 1, although in rural areas where nitrate fertilizer is applied liberally,
concentrations may exceed 600 mg l- 1.
Although silicon is the second most abundant element in the Earth’s crust and is present in
most of all the principal rock-forming minerals, its low solubility means that it is not one of the
most abundant constituents of groundwater. It generally contains between 5 and 40 mg l- 1,
although higher values may be recorded in groundwater from volcanic rocks.
Iron forms approximately 5% of the Earth’s crust and is contained in a great many minerals
in rocks, as well as occurring as ore bodies. Most iron in solution is ionized.
Ion exchange affects the chemical nature of groundwater. The most common natural cation
exchangers are clay minerals, humic acids and zeolites. The replacement of Ca and Mg by
Na may occur when groundwater moves beneath argillaceous rocks into a zone of more
restricted circulation. This produces soft water. Changes in temperature–pressure conditions
may result in precipitation, for instance, a decrease in pressure may liberate CO , causing the
2
precipitation of calcium carbonate.
Certain dissolved gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide alter groundwater chemistry;
others affect the use of water. For example, hydrogen sulphide in concentrations of more
than 1 mg l- 1renders groundwater unfit for human consumption because of the objectionable
odour.
Wells
The commonest way of recovering groundwater is to sink a well and lift water from it (Fig. 4.12).
The most efficient well is developed so as to yield the greatest quantity of groundwater with the
least drawdown and the lowest velocity in the vicinity of the well. The specific capacity of
a well is expressed in litres of yield per metre of drawdown when the well is being pumped.
It is indicative of the relative permeability of the aquifer. Location of a well obviously is important
186
Chapter 4
Figure 4.12
Gravel-packed well installation.
if an optimum supply is to be obtained. A well site should be selected after a careful study of
the geological setting.
Completion of a well in an unconsolidated formation requires that it be cased, so that
the surrounding deposits are supported. Sections of the casing must be perforated
to allow the penetration of groundwater from the aquifer into the well, or screens can
be used. The casing should be as permeable or more permeable than the deposits
it confines.
Wells that supply drinking water should be properly sealed. However, an important advan-
tage of groundwater is its normal comparative freedom from bacterial pollution. For example,
groundwater that has percolated through fine-grained sands usually is cleared of bacterial
pollution within about 30 m of the flow path. On the other hand, flow through open jointed
limestone may transmit pollution for considerable distances. Abandoned wells should be
sealed to prevent aquifers being contaminated.
187
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 4.13
Cone of depression or exhaustion developed around a pumped well in an unconfined aquifer. Q=p k(H2- h2)/(lnR/r). Q=quantity;
k=coefficient of permeability.
The yield from a well in granular material can be increased by surging, which removes the
finer particles from the zone about the well. Water supply from wells in rock can be increased
by driving galleries or adits from the bottom of deep wells. Yields from rock formations also
can be increased by fracturing the rocks with explosives or with fluid pumped into the well
under high pressure or, in the case of carbonate rocks such as chalk, by using acid to enlarge
the discontinuities. The use of explosives in sandstones has led to increases in yield of up to
40%, whereas acidification of wells in carbonate rocks has increased yields by over 100%.
When water is abstracted from a well, the water table in the immediate vicinity is lowered and
assumes the shape of an inverted cone, which is named the cone of depression (Fig. 4.13).
The steepness of the cone is governed by the soil or rock type, it being flatter in highly
permeable materials such as openwork gravels than in the less permeable chalk. The size
of the cone of depression depends on the rate of pumping, equilibrium being achieved when
the rate of abstraction balances the rate of recharge. But if abstraction exceeds recharge,
then the cone of depression increases in size, and its gradual extension from the well may
mean that shallow wells within its area of influence dry up. If these shallow wells are to
continue to be of use, then the offending well should be rested so that the water table may
regain its former level. Otherwise, they must be sunk deeper, which only accentuates the
problem further, since this means a further depression of the water table.
The development of wells for groundwater supplies in rural areas, especially in developing
countries, frequently is of major importance. In such areas, fractured zones and weathered
horizons of granitic or gneissic masses may provide sufficient water for small communities.
188
Chapter 4
In addition, the fractured and weathered contact zones of thick dykes and sills may yield similar
quantities. For example, Bell and Maud (2000) refer to the four categories of well yield
recognized by the South African Department of Water Affairs. These are high well yields
(over 3.0 l s- 1) that are suitable for the supply of medium- to large-scale water schemes
supporting small towns and/or small- to medium-scale irrigation schemes. Moderate well
yields (0.5 to 3.0 l s- 1) are suitable for reticulation schemes for villages, clinics and schools.
Low well yields (0.1 to 0.5 l s- 1) can be used to supply a hand pump for a non-reticulating
water supply for a small community and stock watering purposes. Lastly, very low well yields
(less than 0.1 l s- 1) only provide marginal supplies.
Safe Yield
The abstraction of water from the ground at a greater rate than it is being recharged leads
to a lowering of the water table and upsets the equilibrium between discharge and recharge.
The concept of safe yield has been used to express the quantity of water that can be with-
drawn from the ground without impairing an aquifer as a water source. Draft in excess of safe
yield is overdraft. This can give rise to pollution or cause serious problems due to severely
increased pumping lift. Indeed, this eventually may lead to the exhaustion of a well.
Estimation of the safe yield is a complex problem that must take into account the climatic,
geological and hydrological conditions. As such, the safe yield is likely to vary appreciably
with time. Nonetheless, the recharge–discharge equation, the transmissivity of the aquifer,
the potential sources of pollution and the number of wells in operation must all be given
consideration if an answer is to be found. The safe yield, G, often is expressed as follows:
G=P- Q - E +Q -D S -D S (4.39)
s T g g s
where Pis the precipitation on the area supplying the aquifer, Q is the surface stream flow
s
over the same area, E is the evapotranspiration, Q is the net groundwater inflow to the area,
T g
D S is the change in groundwater storage and D S is the change of surface storage. With the
g s
exception of precipitation, all the terms of this expression can be subjected to artificial
change. The equation cannot be considered an equilibrium equation or solved in terms
of mean annual values. It can be solved correctly only on the basis of specified assumptions
for a stated period of years.
Transmissivity of an aquifer may place a limit on the safe yield, even though this equation
may indicate a potentially large draft. This can only be realised if the aquifer is capable
of transmitting groundwater from the source area to the wells at a rate high enough to sustain
the draft. Where the pollution of groundwater is possible, then the location of wells, their type
189
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
and the rate of abstraction must be planned in such a way that conditions permitting pollution
cannot be developed.
Once an aquifer is developed as a source of water supply, then effective management
becomes increasingly necessary if it is not to suffer deterioration. Moreover, management
should not merely be concerned with the abstraction of groundwater but also should consider
its utilization, since different qualities of water can be put to different uses. Pollution of water
supply is most likely to occur when the level of the water table has been so lowered that all
the water that goes underground within a catchment area drains quickly and directly to the
wells. Such lowering of the water table may cause reversals in drainage, so that water drains
from rivers into the groundwater system, rather than the other way around. This river water
may be polluted.
Artificial Recharge
Artificial recharge may be defined as an augmentation of the natural replenishment of
groundwater storage by artificial means. Its main purpose is water conservation, often with
improved quality as a second aim. For example, soft river water may be used to reduce the
hardness of groundwater. Artificial recharge therefore is used for reducing overdraft, for
conserving and improving surface run-off and for increasing available groundwater supplies.
The suitability of a particular aquifer for artificial recharge must be investigated. For example,
it must have adequate storage, and the bulk of the water recharged should not be lost
rapidly by discharge into a nearby river. The hydrogeological and groundwater conditions
must be amenable to artificial replenishment. An adequate and suitable source of water for
recharge must be available. The source of water for artificial recharge may be storm run-off,
river or lake water, water used for cooling purposes, industrial waste water or sewage water.
Many of these sources require some kind of pre-treatment.
Interaction between artificial recharge and groundwater may lead to precipitation, for example,
of calcium carbonate and iron and manganese salts, resulting in a lower permeability.
Nitrification or denitrification, and possibly even sulphate reduction, may occur during the early
stages of infiltration. Bacterial action may lead to the development of sludges that reducethe
rate of infiltration.
There are several advantages of storing water underground. Firstly, the cost of artificial
recharge may be less than the cost of surface reservoirs, and water stored in the ground is not
subjected to evapotranspiration. Secondly, the likelihood of pollution is reduced. Thirdly, an
aquifer will sometimes act as a distribution system, recharge water moving from one area
190
Chapter 4
to another as groundwater at depth. Fourthly, underground storage is important where suit-
able sites are not available at the surface. Lastly, temperature fluctuations of water stored
underground are reduced.
Artificial recharge may be accomplished by various surface spreading methods utilizing
basins, ditches or flooded areas; by spray irrigation or by pumping water into the ground
via vertical shafts, horizontal collector wells, pits or trenches. The most widely practised
methods are those of water spreading that allow increased infiltration to occur over a wide
area when the aquifer outcrops at or near the surface. Therefore, these methods require that
the ground has a high infiltration capacity. In the basin method, water is contained in
a series of basins formed by a network of dykes, constructed to take maximum advantage
of local topography.
Groundwater Pollution
Pollution can be defined as an impairment of water quality by chemicals, heat or bacteria to
a degree that does not necessarily create an actual public health hazard, but does adversely
affect waters for domestic, farm, municipal, commercial or industrial use. Contamination
denotes impairment of water quality by chemical or bacterial pollution to a degree that creates
an actual hazard to public health.
The greatest danger of groundwater pollution is from surface sources, including animal
manure, sewage sludge, leaking sewers, polluted streams and refuse-disposal sites. Areas
with a thin cover of superficial deposits or where an aquifer is exposed, such as a recharge
area, are the most critical from the point of view of pollution potential. Any possible source of
pollution or contamination in these areas should be carefully evaluated, both before and after any
groundwater supply well is constructed and the viability of groundwater protection measures
are considered (Hiscock et al., 1995). One approach to groundwater quality managementis to
indicate areas with high pollution potential on a map and to pay particular attention to activities
within these vulnerable areas.
The attenuation of a pollutant as it enters and moves through the ground occurs as a result
of biological, chemical and physical processes. Hence, the self-cleansing capacity of a soil
or rock aquifer system depends on the physical and chemical attributes of the pollutant,
the nature of the soil or rock comprising the aquifer and the way in which the pollutant enters
the ground. In general, the concentration of a pollutant decreases as the distance it has trav-
elled through the ground increases. However, it should be appreciated that the slow rate of
travel of pollutants in underground strata means that a case of pollution may go undetected
for a number of years.
191
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The form of the pollutant is clearly an important factor with regard to its susceptibility to the
various purifying processes. For instance, pollutants that are soluble, such as fertilizers and
some industrial wastes, cannot be removed by filtration. Metal solutions may not be suscep-
tible to biological action. Solids, on the other hand, are amenable to filtration, provided that
the transmission media are not coarse-grained, fractured or cavernous. Karst or cavernous
limestone areas pose particular problems in this respect. Insoluble liquids such as hydrocar-
bons are generally transmitted through porous media, although some fraction may be
retained in the media. Usually, however, the most dangerous forms of groundwater pollution
are those that are miscible with the water in the aquifer.
Concentrated sources of pollution are most undesirable because the self-cleansing ability
of the ground in that area is likely to be exceeded. As a result, the “raw” pollutant may be able
to enter an aquifer and travel some considerable distance from the source before being
reduced to a negligible concentration. A much greater hazard exists when the pollutant is
introduced into an aquifer beneath the soil horizon, since the powerful purifying processes
that take place within the soil are bypassed and attenuation of the pollutant is reduced. This
is most critical when the pollutant is added directly to the zone of saturation, because in
most soils and rocks, the horizontal component of permeability usually is much greater than
the vertical one. Consequently, a pollutant can then travel a much greater distance before
significant attenuation occurs. This type of hazard often arises from poorly maintained
domestic septic tanks and soakaways, from the discharge of quarry wastes, farm effluents
and sewage into surface water courses and from the disposal of refuse and commercial
wastes.
It generally is assumed that bacteria move at a maximum rate of about two-thirds the water
velocity. Since most groundwater only moves at the rate of a few metres per year, the
distances travelled by bacteria are usually quite small and, in general, it is unusual for
bacteria to spread more than 33 m from the source of the pollution. However, Brown et al. (1972)
suggested that viruses are capable of spreading over distances that exceed 250 m, although
20 to 30 m may be a more typical figure. Of course, in porous gravel, cavernous limestone
or fissured rock, bacteria and viruses may spread over distances measured in kilometres.
Induced infiltration occurs where a stream is hydraulically connected to an aquifer and lies
within the area of influence of a well (Fig. 4.14). When the well is overpumped, a cone of
depression develops and spreads. Eventually, the aquifer may be recharged by the influent
seepage of surface water, so that some proportion of the pumpage from the well then is
obtained from the surface source. Induced infiltration is significant from the point of view of
groundwater pollution in two respects. Firstly, hydraulic gradients may result in pollutants
travelling in the opposite direction from that normally expected. Secondly, surface water
resources are often less pure than the underlying groundwater; hence the danger of pollution
192
Chapter 4
Figure 4.14
An example of induced infiltration brought about by overpumping. The original hydraulic gradient over much of the area
has been reversed so that pollutants can travel in the opposite direction, namely, towards the well. Additionally, the aquifer
has become influent (i.e. water drains from the river into the aquifer) instead of effluent as it was originally.
is introduced. However, induced infiltration does not automatically cause pollution, and it is
a common method of augmenting groundwater supplies.
A list of potential groundwater pollutants would be almost endless, although one of the most
common sources is sewage sludge (Andrews et al., 1998). This material arises from the
separation and concentration of most of the waste materials found in sewage. Since sludge
contains nitrogen and phosphorus, it has value as a fertilizer. Although this does not neces-
sarily lead to groundwater pollution, the presence in sludge of contaminants such as heavy
metals, nitrates, persistent organic compounds and pathogens does mean that the practice
must be carefully controlled. The widespread use of chemical and organic pesticides or
herbicides is another possible source of groundwater contamination (Chilton et al., 1998, 2005).
The disposal of wastes in landfill sites leads to the production of leachate and gases, which
may present a health hazard as a consequence of pollution of groundwater supply. Leachate
often contains high concentrations of dissolved organic substances resulting from the decom-
position of organic material such as vegetable matter and paper. Site selection for waste
disposal must take into account the character of the material that is likely to be tipped.
193
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
For instance, toxic or oily liquid waste represents a serious risk, although sites on impermeable
substrata often merit a lower assessment of risk. Therefore, selection of a landfill site for a
particular waste or a mixture of wastes involves a consideration of the geological and hydro-
geological conditions. Argillaceous sedimentary, massive igneous and metamorphic rocks have
low permeabilities, and therefore, afford the most protection to water supply (Bell et al., 1996).
By contrast, the least protection is offered by rock masses intersected by open discontinuities
or in which solution features are developed, or by open-work gravel deposits.
Leachate pollution can be tackled by either concentrating and containing, or by diluting and
dispersing. Infiltration through sandy ground of liquids from a landfill may lead to their decon-
tamination and dilution. Hence, sites for disposal of domestic refuse can be chosen where
decontamination has the maximum chance of reaching completion and where groundwater
sources are located far away enough to enable dilution to be effective. Consequently, domes-
tic waste can be tipped at dry sites on sandy material that has a thickness of at least 15 m.
Water supply sources should be located at least 0.8 km away from the landfill site. They should
not be located on discontinuous rocks unless overlain by 15 m of clay deposits. Potential toxic
waste should be contained. Such sites should be underlain and confined by at least 15 m
of impermeable strata, and any source abstracting groundwater for domestic use should be
at least 2 km away. Furthermore, the topography of the site should be such that run-off can be
diverted from the landfill, so that it can be disposed of without causing pollution to surface
waters. Containment can be achieved by an artificial impermeable lining placed over the base
of a site. Drains can be installed beneath a landfill to convey leachate to a sump, which then
can be either pumped to a sewer, transported away by tanker or treated on site.
Cemeteries form a possible health hazard. Decomposing bodies produce fluids that can leak
to the water table if a leakproof coffin is not used. The leachate produced from a single grave
is of the order of 0.4 m3a- 1, and this may constitute a threat for about 10 years. The minimum
distance required by law in England between a potable-water well and a cemetery is 91.4 m
(100 yards). However, a distance of around 2500 m is better because the purifying processes
in the soil can sometimes break down.
Run-off from roads can contain chemicals from many sources, including those that have been
dropped, spilled or deliberately spread on the road. For instance, hydrocarbons from petro-
leum products and chlorides from de-icing agents are potential pollutants. There also is the
possibility of accidents involving vehicles carrying large quantities of chemicals.
According to Mackay (1998), volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) are the most frequently
detected organic contaminants in water supply wells in the United States. Of the VOCs, by
far the most common are chlorinated hydrocarbon compounds. Conversely, petroleum hydro-
carbons are rarely present in supply wells. This may be due to their in situ biodegradation.
194
Chapter 4
Many of the VOCs are liquids and usually are referred to as non-aqueous phase liquids
(NAPLs), which are sparingly soluble in water. Those that are lighter than water, such as the
petroleum hydrocarbons, are termed LNAPLs, whereas those that are denser than water,
such as the chlorinated solvents, are called DNAPLs. Of the VOCs, the DNAPLs are the least
amenable to remediation (Acworth, 2001). Depending on the hydrogeological conditions,
DNAPLs may percolate downwards into the saturated zone if they penetrate the ground in a
large enough quantity. This can occur in coarse soils or discontinuous rock masses. Plumes
of dissolved VOCs develop from the source of pollution. Although dissolved VOCs migrate at
lesser speeds than the average velocity of groundwater, there are many examples of chlori-
nated VOC plumes several kilometres in length in the United States occurring in sand and
gravel aquifers. Such plumes contain billions of litres of contaminated water. Because VOCs
are sparingly soluble in water, the time taken for complete dissolution, especially of DNAPLs,
by groundwater flow in coarse soils is estimated to be decades or even centuries.
Nitrate pollution is basically the result of intensive cultivation due to the large quantity of
synthetic nitrogenous fertilizer used, although over-manuring with natural organic fertilizer can
have the same result (Foster, 2000). Rapid transformation into nitrate results in an ion that,
because it is neither adsorbed by nor precipitated in the soil, becomes easily leached by
heavy rainfall and infiltrating water. However, the nitrate does not have an immediate effect
on groundwater quality, possibly because most of the leachate that percolates through the
unsaturated zone as intergranular seepage has a typical velocity of about 1 m per year. Thus,
there may be a considerable delay between the application of the fertilizer and the subsequent
increase in the concentration of nitrate in groundwater. This time lag, which is frequently
of the order of 10 years or more, makes it very difficult to correlate fertilizer application
with increased concentration of nitrate in groundwater. Hence, although nitrate levels may be
unacceptably high now, they may worsen in the future because of the increasing use of
nitrogenousfertilizers.
There are at least two ways in which nitrate pollution of water is known or suspected to be a
threat to health. Firstly, the build-up of stable nitrate compounds in the bloodstream reduces
its oxygen-carrying capacity. Infants under one year of age are at most risk. Consequently, a
limit of 50 mg l- 1 of nitrate (NO ) has been recommended by the World Health Organisation
3
(Anon, 1993). Secondly, the possible combination of nitrates and amines through the action of
bacteria in the digestive tract results in the formation of potentially carcinogenic nitrosamines.
Measures that can be taken to alleviate nitrate pollution include better land-use management,
mixing of water from various sources or the treatment of high-nitrate water before it is put into
supply (Sigram et al., 2005). In general, the ion exchange process has been recommended
as the preferred means of treating groundwater, although this may not be considered cost
effective for all sources.
195
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 4.15
Saline intrusion occurring in pumped coastal aquifer.
Excessive lowering of the water table along a coast as a consequence of over abstraction
can lead to saline intrusion. The salt water enters the aquifer via submarine outcrops, thereby
displacing fresh water. However, the fresh water still overlies the saline water and continues
to flow from the aquifer to the sea. The encroachment of salt water may extend for several
kilometres inland, leading to the abandonment of wells. The first sign of saline intrusion is
likely to be a progressively upward trend in the chloride concentration of water obtained from
the affected wells. Typically, chloride levels may increase from a normal value of around
25 mg l- 1up to something approaching 19,000 mg l- 1, compared with a recommended upper
limit for drinking water in Europe of 200 mg l- 1(Anon, 1980). Generally, saline water is drawn
up towards the well and this sometimes is termed upcoming (Fig. 4.15). This is a dangerous
condition that can occur even if the aquifer is not overpumped, and a significant proportion of
the fresh water flow still reaches the sea. A well may be ruined by an increase in salt content
even before the actual “cone” reaches the bottom of the well. This is due to leaching of the
interface by fresh water. Once intrusion develops, it is not easy to control. The slow rates of
groundwater flow, the density differences between fresh and salt waters and the flushing
required usually mean that pollution, once established, may take many years to remove
under natural conditions. Reduction of pumping to eliminate overdraft or artificial recharging
have been used as methods of controlling saline intrusion. McDonald et al. (1998) described
the use of resistivity tomography and ground conductivity surveys to delineate saline intrusion
in a tidal coastal wetland in the south of England.
Irrigation water may pose a pollution hazard to groundwater, especially in arid and semi-arid
regions where soluble salts may be present in soil. These salts can be leached from the soil
and, hence, become concentrated in irrigation water, the situation being worsened if poor-
quality water is used for irrigation purposes. Indeed, salinization of soils is a problem in many
parts of the world. In such instances, shallow groundwater may be recharged by irrigation
water. Hibbs and Boghici (1999) referred to two areas along the Rio Grande in Texas, where
196
Chapter 4
Table 4.7. Composition of acid mine water from a South African coalfield
Determinant Sample Sample Sample Sample
(mg l-1, where appropriate) 1 2 3 4
TDS 4844 2968 3202 2490
Suspended solids 33 10.4 12 10.0
EC (mS m- 1) 471 430 443 377
pH value 1.9 2.4 2.95 2.9
Turbidity as NTU 5.5 0.6 2.0 0.9
Nitrate NO as N 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
3
Chlorides as CI 310 431 406 324
Fluoride as F 0.6 0.5 0.33 0.6
Sulphate as SO 3250 1610 1730 1256
4
Total hardness — 484 411 576
Calcium hardness as CaCO — 285 310 327
3
Calcium Ca 173.8 114.0 124 131
Magnesium Mg 89.4 48.4 49.5 60.5
Sodium Na 247.0 326.0 311 278
Potassium K 7.3 9.4 8.9 6.4
Iron Fe 248.3 128 140 87
Manganese Mn 17.9 15 9.9 13.4
Aluminium Al — 124 — 112
shallow aquifers have been adversely affected by the intensive use of irrigation water. They
noted that there is a tendency for the salinity of the groundwater in the aquifer to increase
downstream, the TDS increasing from between 1000 and 3500 mg l- 1 to between 3000
and 6000 mg l- 1.
Acid mine drainage is produced when natural oxidation of sulphide minerals, notably pyrite,
occurs in mine rock or waste that are exposed to air and water (Bullock and Bell, 1995). This
is a consequence of the oxidation of sulphur in the mineral concerned to a higher oxidation
state, with the formation of sulphuric acid and sulphate, and if aqueous iron is present and
unstable, to the precipitation of ferric iron with iron hydroxide. Acid mine drainage, however,
does not occur if the sulphide minerals are nonreactive or if the host rock contains sufficient
alkaline material to neutralize the acidity. Acid generation can lead to elevated levels of heavy
metals and sulphate in the affected water that obviously have a detrimental effect on its
quality (Table 4.7).
Acid mine drainage from underground mines generally appears at the surface as point
discharges (Bell et al., 2002). Acid mine drainage also can develop from surface sources such
as mine waste. A major source of acid mine drainage may result from the closure of a mine.
197
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 4.16
Vegetation killed by acid mine drainage seeping from a shallow abandoned mine, Witbank Coalfield, South Africa.
When a mine is abandoned and dewatering by pumping ceases, the groundwater level rebounds.
The workings, however, often act as drainage systems, so that the groundwater does not
rise to its former level. Consequently, a residual dewatered zone remains that is subject
to continuing oxidation. Groundwater may drain to the surface from old drainage adits, faults,
springs and shafts that intercept rock in which groundwater is under artesian pressure.
Hence, those streams receiving drainage from abandoned mines are often chronically
polluted. This can have a notable impact on the aquatic environment, as well as vegetation
(Fig. 4.16).
There are three key strategies in acid mine drainage management, namely, control of the
acid generation process, control of acid migration, and collection and treatment of acid mine
drainage. Obviously, the best solution is to control acid generation. Source control of acid
mine drainage involves measures to prevent or inhibit oxidation, acid generation or contaminant
leaching. If acid generation is prevented, then there is no risk of the contaminants enteringthe
environment. Such control methods involve the removal or isolation of sulphide material,
or the exclusion of water or air. The latter is much more practical and can be achieved by air-
sealing adits in mines, or by placing a cover over acid-generating material, such as wastes.
198
Chapter 4
Migration control is considered when acid generation is occurring and cannot be inhibited.
Since water is the transport medium, control relies on the prevention of water entry
to the source of acid mine drainage. Release control is based on measures to collect
and treat either or both ground and surface acid mine drainage. In some cases,
especially in working mines, this is the only practical option available. Treatment
processes have concentrated on neutralization to raise the pH and precipitate metals.
Lime or limestone commonly is used, although offering only a partial solution to the
problem. Jarvis et al. (2003) described the use of settlement lagoons and a wetland to
treat mine water.
As discussed, acid generation may occur in the surface layers of spoil heaps where air
and water have access to sulphide minerals. Tailings deposits that have a high content of
sulphide represent another potential source of acid generation. However, the low permeabil-
ity of many tailings deposits, together with the fact that they commonly are flooded, means
that the rate of acid generation and release is limited, but it can continue to take place long
after a tailings deposit has been abandoned.
A variety of waste waters and process effluents arise during coal mining operations
(Bell and Kerr, 1993). These may be produced by the actual extraction process, by the
subsequent preparation of the coal or from the disposal of colliery spoil. The mineralogical
character of the coal and spoil, and the washing processes employed, all affect the type
of effluent produced. The major pollutants generally associated with coal mining are
suspended solids, dissolved salts (particularly chlorides), acidity and iron compounds. A high
level of mineralization is characteristic of many coal mining discharges and is reflected in
the high values of electrical conductivity (values of 335,000 m S cm- 1have been recorded).
Not all minewaters, however, are highly mineralized. Elevated levels of suspended matter
are associated with most coal mining effluents. The extraction of coal, particularly from
opencast sites and from drift mines, may lead to the discharge of high loads of silt and fine
coal particles into rivers.
The routine monitoring of groundwater level and water quality provides an early warning of
pollution incidents. The first important step in designing an efficient groundwater-monitoring
system is gaining a proper understanding of the mechanics and dynamics of pollutant
propogation, the nature of the controlling flow mechanism and the aquifer characteristics.
There should be a sufficient number of drillholes to allow the extent, configuration and
concentration of a pollution plume to be determined. Furthermore, construction of a groundwater
quality monitoring well must be related to the geology of the site, in particular, the well struc-
ture should not react with the groundwater if water quality is being monitored. These wells
frequently are constructed using inert plastic casings and screens. Monitoring also can be
199
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
carried out by using geophysical methods, especially resistivity surveys and ground-probing
radar (McDowell et al., 2002). A methodology for delineating groundwater protection zones
against pollution has been discussed by Bussard et al. (2006), which is based on the
complete groundwater flow cycle. In this way, zones of groundwater source recharge can be
defined, thereby allowing targeting of remediation programmes.
200
Chapter 5
Description, Properties and Behaviour of
Soils and Rocks
Soil Classification
Any system of soil classification involves grouping the different soil types into categories
that possess similar properties and, in so doing, providing the engineer with a system-
atic method of soil description. Casagrande (1948) advanced one of the first comprehen-
sive engineering classifications of soil. In the Casagrande system, the coarse-grained soils are
distinguished from the fine on the basis of particle size. Gravels and sands are the two principal
types of coarse-grained soils and, in this classification, both are subdivided into five subgroups
on the basis of grading (Table 5.1). Well-graded soils are those in which the particle size distribu-
tion extends over a wide range without excess or deficiency in any particular sizes, whereas in
uniformly graded soils, the distribution extends over a very limited range of particle sizes. In poorly
graded soils, the distribution contains an excess of some particle sizes and a deficiency of others.
A plasticity chart is used when classifying fine-grained soils, that is, silts and clays (see Table 5.2).
Table 5.1. Symbols used in the Casagrande soil classification
Main soil type Prefix
Coarse-grained soils Gravel G
Sand S
Fine-grained soils Silt M
Clay C
Organic silts and clays O
Fibrous soils Peat Pt
Subdivisions Suffix
For coarse-grainedsoils Well graded, with little or no fines W
Well graded with suitable clay binder C
Uniformly graded with little or no fines U
Poorly graded with little or no fines P
Poorly graded with appreciable F
fines or well graded with excess fines
For fine-grained soils Low compressibility (plasticity) L
Medium compressibility (plasticity) I
High compressibility (plasticity) H
201
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.2. Unified Soil Classification. Coarse soils. More than half of the material is larger than No. 200
sieve size†
Field identification procedures (excluding particles larger than Group Typical
76 mm and basing fractions on estimated weights) symbols* names
Gravels. More than Clean gravels Wide range in grain GW Well-graded gravels,
half of coarse (little or no fines) size and substantial gravel–sand
fraction is larger amounts of all mixtures, little or
than No. 7 intermediate no fines
sieve size* particle sizes
Predominantly one size GP Poorly graded
or a range of sizes gravels, gravel–
with some intermediate sand mixtures,
sizes missing little or no fines
Gravels with Non-plastic fines (for GM Silty gravels, poorly
fines (appreciable identification proce- graded gravel–
amount of fines) dures see ML below) sand–silt mixtures
Plastic fines (for GC Clayey gravels, poorly
identification procedures, graded gravel–
see CL below) sand–clay mixtures
Sands. More than Clean sands Wide range in grain SW Well-graded
half of coarse (little or sizes and substantial sands, gravelly
fraction is no fines) amounts of all sands, little
smaller than intermediate or no fines
No. 7 sieve size‡ particle sizes
Predominantly one size SP Poorly graded
or a range of sizes sands, gravelly
with some intermediate sands,little
sizes missing or no fines
Sands with fines Non-plastic fines (for SM Silty sands, poorly
(appreciable identification proce- graded sand–silt
amount of fines) dures, see ML below) mixtures
Plastic fines (for identifi- SC Clayey sands, poorly
cation procedures, graded sand–clay
see CL below) mixtures
*Boundary classifications: Soils possessing characteristics of two groups are designated by combinations of group
symbols. For example, GW–GC, well-graded gravel–sand mixture with clay binder;
†All sieve sizes on this chart are US standard. The No. 200 sieve size is about the smallest particle visible to the
naked eye;
‡For visual classification, the 6.3 mm size may be used as equivalent to the No. 7 sieve size.
Field identification procedure for fine-grained soils or fractions: These procedures are to be performed on the minus
No. 40 sieve-size particles, approximately 0.4 mm. For field classification purposes, screening is not intended, simply
remove by hand the coarse particles that interfere with the tests.
Dilatancy (reacting to shaking): After removing particles larger than No. 40 sieve size, prepare a pat of moist soil with a
volume of about 1 cm3. Add enough water if necessary to make the soil soft but not sticky. Place the pat in the open palm
of one hand and shake horizontally, striking vigorously against the other hand several times. A positive reaction consists of
the appearance of water on the surface of the pat, which changes to a livery consistency and becomes glossy. When the
sample is squeezed between the fingers, the water and gloss disappear from the surface, the pat stiffens and, finally, it
cracks and crumbles. The rapidity of appearance of water during shaking and of its disappearance during squeezing assist
in identifying the character of the fines in a soil. Very fine clean sands give the quickest and most distinct reaction, whereas
a plastic clay has no reaction. Inorganic silts, such as typical rock flour, show a moderately quick reaction.
Dry strength (crushing characteristic): After removing particles larger than No. 40 sieve size, mould a pat of soil to the
202
Chapter 5
Table 5.2.—Cont’d.
Information required for Laboratory
describing soils classification criteria
D
Give typical name; indicate Determine percentages C = 60 Greater than 4
approximate percentages of of gravel and sand u D
10
sand and gravel; maximum from grain-size curve. (D )2
size; angularity, surface Depending on fines C = 30 Between 1 and 3
e D ¥ D
condition, and hardness of the (fraction smaller 10 60
coarse grains; local or geologic than No. 200 sieve Not meeting all gradation
name and other pertinent size) coarse-grained requirements for GW
descriptive information: and soils are classified
symbols in parenthesis as follows: Atterberg limits Above ‘A’ line
For undistributed soils add Less than 5%: GW, GP, below ‘A’ line, or with PIbetween
information on stratification, SW, SP. More than PI less than 4 4 and 7 are
degree of compactness, 12%: GM, GC, SM, borderlinecases
cementation, moisture conditions, SC. 5–12%: Atterberg limits requiring use of
and drainage characteristics Borderline cases above ‘A’ line with dual symbols
require use of dual PIgreater than 7
Example: symbols
Silty sand, gravelly; about
D
20% hard, angular gravel C = 60 Greater than 6
u D
particles 12.5 mm maximum 10
size; rounded and subangular (D )2
sand grains coarse to fine, C e=
D
¥30
D
Between 1 and 3
about 15% nonplastic fines 10 60
with low dry strength; well
compacted and moist in Not meeting all gradation requirements
place; alluvial sand; (SM) for SW
Atterberg limits Above ‘A’ line with
below ‘A’ line with PIbetween
PIless than 5 4 and 7 are
borderlinecases
Atterberg limits requiring use of
above ‘A’ line with dual symbols
PIgreater than 7
consistency of putty, adding water if necessary. Allow the pat to dry completely by oven, sun or air drying, and then
test its strength by breaking and crumbling between the fingers. This strength is a measure of the character and quan-
tity of the colloidal fraction contained in the soil. The dry strength increases with increasing plasticity. High dry strength
is characteristic for clays of the CH group. A typical inorganic silt possesses only very slight dry strength. Silty fine
sands and silts have about the same slight dry strength, but can be distinguished by the feel when powdering the dried
specimen. Fine sand feels gritty, whereas a typical silt has the smooth feel of flour.
Toughness (consistency near plastic limit): After removing particles larger than the No. 40 sieve size, a specimen of
soil about 1 cm3in size, is moulded to the consistency of putty. If too dry, water must be added and if sticky, the speci-
men should be spread out in a thin layer and allowed to lose some moisture by evaporation. Then the specimen is
rolled out by hand on a smooth surface or between the palms into a thread about 3 mm in diameter. The thread is then
folded and re-rolled repeatedly. During this manipulation, the moisture content is gradully reduced and the specimen
stiffens, finally loses its plasticity, and crumbles when the plastic limit is reached.
After the thread crumbles, the pieces should be lumped together and a slight kneading action continued until the lump
crumbles. The tougher the thread near the plastic limit and the stiffer the lump when it finally crumbles, the more potent
is the colloidal clay fraction in the soil. Weakness of the thread at the plastic limit and quick loss of coherence of the
lump below the plastic limit indicate either inorganic clay of low plasticity, or materials such as kaolin-type clays and
organic clays that occur below the A-line. Highly organic clays have a very weak and spongy feel at the plastic limit.
203
noitacifitnedidleifrednunevigsasnoitcarfehtgniyfitnedinievrucezisniargesU
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.2.—Cont’d. Unified Soil Classification. Fine soils. More than half of the material is smaller than
No. 200 sieve sizeb
Group
Identification procedures on fraction smaller than No. 40 sieve size symbolsa Typical names
Toughness*
Dry strength* Dilatancy* (consistency
(crushing (reaction to near plastic
characteristics) shaking) limit)
Silts and clays None to slight Quick to slow None ML Inorganic silts
liquid limit and very fine
less than 50 sands, rock
flour, silty or
clayey fine
sands with
slight plasticity
Medium to high None to Medium CL Inorganic clays of
very slow low to medium
plasticity,
gravelly clays,
sandy clays,
silty clays,
lean clays
Slight to medium Slow Slight OL Organic silts
and organic
silt-clays of
low plasticity
Silts and clays Slight to medium Slow to none Slight to MH Inorganic silts
liquid limit medium micaceous or
greater than 50 diatomaceous
fine sandy or
silty soils,
clastic siltsb
High to very None High CH Inorganic clays of
high high plasticity,
fat clays
Medium to high None to Slight to OH Organic clays of
very slow medium medium to
high plasticity
Highly organic Readily identified by colour, odour, spongy feel, and Pt Peat and other
soils frequently by fibrous texture highly organic
soils
*See footnotes to Table
204
Chapter 5
Table 5.2.—Cont’d.
Information required for
describing soils Laboratory classification criteria
Give typical name: indicate
degree and character of
plasticity, amount and
maximum size of coarse
grains, colour in wet
conditions, odour if any, local
or geological name, and other
pertinent descriptive information
and symbol in parentheses
For undisturbed soils add
information on structure,
stratification, consistency in
undisturbed and remoulded
states, moisture and drainage
conditions
Plasticity chart for laboratory classification of
Example: fine-grained soils
Clayey silt, brown: slightly
plastic; small percentage
of fine sand, numerous
vertical root holes; firm
and dry in place; loess; (ML)
205
noitacifitnedidleifrednunevigsasnoitcarfehtgniyfitnedinievrucezis-niargesU
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
On this chart, the plasticity index is plotted against liquid limit. The A line is taken as the bound-
ary between organic and inorganic soils, the latter lying above the line. Each of the main soil types
and subgroups are given a letter, a pair of which are combined in the group symbol, the former
being the prefix, the latter the suffix. Subsequently, the Unified Soil Classification system was
developed from the Casagrande system.
According to Anon (1999), a full description of a soil should provide data on its particle size,
plasticity, particle characteristics and colour, as well as its bedding, discontinuities and
strength. Anon divides soils into coarse and fine types. Coarse soils are gravels and sands,
and fine soils are silts and clays.
Boulders, cobbles, gravels, sands, silts and clays are distinguished as individual groups
on the basis of their particle size distribution (Table 5.3a). Gravel, sand and silt have been
subdivided into coarse-, medium- and fine-grained subgroups, and fine soils have been
subdivided on the basis of plasticity. Coarse soils are described as well graded or poorly
graded. Two further types of poorly graded coarse soils are recognized, namely, uniformly
graded and gap graded (Fig. 1.18). Silts and clays are subdivided according to their liquid
limits (Table 5.3b).
Most soils consist of more than one grade size type. If boulders and cobbles are present in
composite soil types, then they are removed before an attempt is made at classification, their
proportions being recorded separately. Their presence should be recorded in the soil descrip-
tion. Very coarse deposits should be described as boulders if over half of the very coarse
material is of boulder size. They may be described as cobbly boulders if cobbles are an
Table 5.3a. Particle size distribution of soils
Types of material Sizes (mm)
Boulders Over 200
Cobbles 60–200
Coarse 20–60
Gravel Medium 6–20
Fine 2–6
Coarse 0.6–2
Sand Medium 0.2–0.6
Fine 0.06–0.2
Coarse 0.02–0.06
Silt Medium 0.006–0.02
Fine 0.002–0.006
Clay Less than 0.002
206
Chapter 5
Table 5.3b. Plasticity according to liquid limit
Description Plasticity Range of liquid limit
Lean or silty Low plasticity Less than 35
Intermediate Intermediate plasticity 35–50
Fat High plasticity 50–70
Very fat Very high plasticity 70–90
Extra fat Extra high plasticity Over 90
important second constituent in the very coarse fraction. If over half of the very coarse mate-
rial is of cobble size, then it is described as cobbles. Similarly, it may be described as boul-
dery cobbles if boulders are an important second constituent in the very coarse fraction.
Mixtures of the very coarse material and soil can be described by combining the terms for the
very coarse constituent and the soil constituent as shown in Table 5.4.
According to Anon (1999), further factors that should be incorporated in a soil description, to
help identification of soil, include the following:
1. Mass characteristics
(a) Field strength or compactness and indication of moisture condition. A scale for esti-
mating the strength of clays is given in Table 5.5, however, where assessment of
strength is important, appropriate testing should be undertaken. The relative densi-
ties of sands and gravels may be determined by the standard penetration test (see
Chapter 7) that, in turn, can be related to their angle of friction (Table 7.3).
(b) The thickness of the bedding should be described as indicated in Table 2.1.
Where beds are too thin to be described individually, they may be referred to as
interbedded or interlaminated.
(c) Discontinuities include joints, fissures, and shear surfaces. Their orientation,
spacing, persistence, openness and surface texture (i.e. rough, smooth, pol-
ished, striated) should be described (see Chapter 2).
Table 5.4. Mixtures of very coarse materials and soil
Description Composition
Boulders (or cobbles) with a little finer material* Up to 5% finer material
Boulders (or cobbles) with some finer material* 5–20% finer material
Boulders (or cobbles) with much finer material* 20–50% finer material
Finer material* with many boulders (or cobbles) 50–20% boulders (or cobbles)
Finer material* with some boulders (or cobbles) 20–5% boulders (or cobbles)
Finer material* with occasional boulders (or cobbles) Up to 5% boulders (or cobbles)
*Give the name of the finer material, e.g. Gravel with occasional boulders; cobbly boulders with some
finer material (sand with some fines).
207
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.5. Consistency of fine soils
Approximate
Consistency undrained shear
Description index (IC) strength (kPa) Field identification
Hard — Over 300 Indented with difficulty by
thumbnail, brittle
Very stiff Above 1 150–300 Readily indented by
thumbnail, still
very tough
Stiff 0.75–1 75–150 Readily indented by thumb
but penetrated only with
difficulty. Cannot be
moulded in the fingers
Firm 0.5–0.75 40–75 Can be penetrated several
centimetres by thumb
with moderate effort, and
moulded in the fingers by
strong pressure
Soft Less than 0.5 20–40 Easily penetrated several
centimetres by thumb,
easily moulded
Very soft — Less than 20 Easily penetrated several
centimetres by fist,
exudes between
fingers when squeezed
in fist
IC = LL- m , where m=moisture content, PL=plastic limit and LL=liquid limit.
LL- PL
2. Material characteristics
(a) The colour should relate to that of the overall impression of the soil. Soil with
more than one colour can be described as mottled or multicoloured. A colour
chart such as the Munsell chart should be used to help describe the colour
of soils.
(b) Particle shape, particle grading and composition. In particular instances, it may
be necessary to describe the shape of soil particles (see Fig. 1.16). Grading of
coarse soils has been referred to earlier.
(c) Soil name (in capitals, e.g. SAND) is based on grading and plasticity. A coarse soil
(omitting any boulders or cobbles) contains around 65% or more coarse material
and is referred to as SAND or GRAVEL, according to the size fraction that
predominates. Gravel and sand are further divided into coarse, medium and fine
categories. Mixtures of coarse soil types can be described as shown in Table 5.6.
Anon (1999) recommended that fine soil should be described as SILT or CLAY
208
Chapter 5
Table 5.6. Mixed coarse soil types
Description Composition of the coarse fraction
Slightly sandy gravel Up to 5% sand
Sandy gravel 5–20% sand
Very sandy gravel Over 20% sand
Gravel/sand About equal proportions of gravel and sand
Very gravelly sand Over 20% gravel
Gravelly sand 5–20% gravel
Slightly gravelly sand Up to 5% gravel
depending on its plastic properties (although it cautioned against the use of the
A-line on the plasticity chart as a reliable method of distinguishing between silts,
which are supposed to plot below, and clays that plot above). It also was recom-
mended that the terms should be mutually exclusive. In other words, terms such
as silty clay were regarded as redundant. Field identification of fine soils can be
made according to dilatancy, dry strength and toughness tests (see Table 5.2).
The terms outlined in Table 5.7 can be used to describe common soils that
include a mixture of soil types.
3. Geological formation, age and type of deposit.
4. Classification (optional).
When small amounts of organic matter occur throughout a soil, they can have a notable effect
on plasticity and therefore the engineering properties. Increase in the quantities of organic
matter can increase these effects. Nonetheless, soils in which the organic contents may be
up to 30%, by weight, behave primarily as mineral soils.
Table 5.7. Description common types of soils
Approximate proportion of
secondary constituent
Description Main soil type Coarse soil Coarse or fine soil
Slightly clayey or silty Sand — >5%
and/or sandy or gravelly
Clayey or silty and/or or — 5–20%
sandy or gravelly
Very clayey or silty Gravel — >20%
and/or sandy or gravelly
Very sandy or gravelly Silt >65%
Sandy and/or gravelly or 35– 65% —
Slightly sandy and/or gravelly Clay <35%
209
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.8. Some values of gravels, sands and silts
Gravels Sands Silts
Specific gravity 2.5–2.8 2.6–2.7 2.64–2.66
Bulk density (Mg m- 3) 1.45–2.3 1.4–2.15 1.82–2.15
Dry density (Mg m- 3) 1.4–2.1 1.35–1.9 1.45–1.95
Porosity (%) 20–50 23–35 —
Void ratio — — 0.35–0.85
Liquid limit (%) — — 24–35
Plastic limit (%) — — 14–25
Coefficient of consolidation (m2yr- 1) — — 12.2
Cohesion (kPa) — — 75
Angle of friction (deg) 35–45 32–42 32–36
Peat is an accumulation of plant remains that has undergone some degree of decomposition.
Inorganic soil material may occur as secondary constituents in peat, and should be
described, for example, as slightly clayey or very sandy.
Coarse Soils
The microstructure of sand or gravel refers to its particle arrangement that, in turn, involves its
packing. If grains approximate to spheres, then the closest type of systematic packing is
rhombohedral packing, whereas the most open type is cubic packing, the porosities approxi-
mating to 26 and 48%, respectively. Put another way, the void ratio of a well-sorted and
perfectly cohesionless aggregate of equidimensional grains can range between values of about
0.35 and 1.00. If the void ratio is more than unity, the microstructure will be collapsible or
metastable. Some values of the physical properties of sands and gravels are given in Table 5.8.
Grain size and sorting have a significant influence on the engineering behaviour of coarse soils.
Generally, the larger the particles, the higher the strength, and deposits consisting of a mixture
of different-sized particles usually are stronger than those that are uniformly graded. For exam-
ple, the amount of gravel in a sand–gravel mixture has a significant effect on shear strength,
which increases considerably as the gravel content is increased up to 50 or 60%. Beyond this
point, the material becomes less well graded, and the density does not increase. The density
of a soil is governed by the manner in which its solid particles are packed. For instance, coarse
soils may be densely or loosely packed. Densely packed sands are almost incompressible,
whereas loosely packed deposits, located above the water table, are relatively compressible but
otherwise stable. In other words, the behaviour of such sediments depends, to a large extent,
on their relative density. Indeed, a maximum and minimum density can be distinguished. The
smaller the range of particle sizes present and the more angular the particles, the smaller the
minimum density. Conversely, if a wide range of particle sizes is present, the void space is
210
Chapter 5
reduced accordingly, hence the maximum density is higher. A useful way to characterize the
density of a coarse-grained soil is by its relative density, D, which is defined as:
r
e - e
D r = emax - e (5.1)
max min
where e is the naturally occurring void ratio, e is the maximum void ratio and e is the min-
max min
imum void ratio. If the relative density of sand varies erratically, this can give rise to differen-
tial settlement. Generally, settlement in sands is relatively rapid. However, when the stresses
are large enough to produce appreciable grain fracturing, there is a significant time lag.
Fundamentally, there are two basic mechanisms that contribute towards the deformation of
coarse soil, namely, distortion of the particles and the relative motion between them. These
two mechanisms usually are interdependent. At any instant during the deformation process,
different mechanisms may be acting in different parts of the soil, and these may change as
deformation continues. Interparticle sliding can occur at all stress levels, the stress required
for its initiation increasing with decreasing void ratio. Crushing and fracturing of particles
begins in a minor way at small stresses, becoming increasingly important when some critical
stress is reached. This critical stress is smallest when the soil is loosely packed and uniformly
graded, and consists of large angular particles with a low strength. Usually, fracturing only
becomes important when the stress level exceeds 3.5 MPa.
The internal shearing resistance of a coarse soil is generated by friction when the grains in
the zone of shearing are caused to slide, roll and rotate against each other. The angle of
shearing resistance is influenced by the grain size distribution and grain shape. The larger
the grains, the wider is the zone affected. The more angular the grains are, the greater the
frictional resistance to their relative movement, since they interlock more thoroughly than do
rounded ones. Therefore, they produce a larger angle of shearing resistance (Table 5.9).
Figure 5.1 shows that dense sand has a high peak strength and that when it is subjected to
shear stress it expands up to the point of failure, after which a slight decrease in volume may
occur. Conversely, loose sand compacts under shearing stress, and its residual strength may
be similar to that of dense sand. Both curves in Figure 5.1 exhibit strains that are approximately
Table 5.9. Effect of grain shape and grading on the peak friction
angle of sand
Shape and grading Loose Dense
Rounded, uniform 30∞ 37∞
Rounded, well graded 34∞ 40∞
Angular, uniform 35∞ 43∞
Angular, well graded 39∞ 45∞
211
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 5.1
Stress–strain curves for dense and loose sand.
proportional to stress at low stress levels, suggesting a large component of elastic distortion.
If the stress is reduced, the unloading stress–strain curve indicates that not all the strain is
recovered on unloading. The hysteresis loss represents the energy lost in crushing and reposi-
tioning of grains. At higher shear stresses, the strains are proportionally greater, indicating
greater crushing.
The presence of water in the voids of a coarse soil usually does not produce significant
changes in the value of the angle of shearing resistance. However, if stresses develop in the
pore water, they may bring about changes in the effective stresses between the particles,
whereupon the shear strength and the stress–strain relationships may be altered radically.
Barton et al. (1993) distinguished between normal sands and those that had undergone a
notable degree of diagenetic alteration. They regarded normal sands as those that did not pos-
sess any cohesion derived from grain interlock or cementation. Any cohesion possessed by
these normal sands was due to the presence of a clay matrix. If such soils do not have a clay
fraction, then they are cohesionless. Normal sands grade into diagenetically altered sands.
Barton et al. recognized three groups of diagenetically altered sands, namely, locked sands,
overlocked sands and slightly cemented sands. Locked sands show no visible bonding and,
although trace amounts of cement may be present, their effect on strength is negligible. The
cohesion of locked sands is derived from grain overgrowths. Cemented sands possess
212
Chapter 5
enough cement to develop cohesion but still break down into their component grains. At low
stress levels, locked sands undergo high rates of dilation. Dilatancy becomes suppressed as
the level of stress increases, since the asperities on the surfaces of individual grains are
sheared through rather than causing dilation. They have peak frictional strengths considerably
in excess of those of dense sand, with residual angles of friction varying between 30 and 35∞.
Liquefaction is a phenomenon wherein a mass of soil loses a large percentage of its shear
resistance and flows in a manner resembling a liquid until the shear stresses acting on the
mass are as low as the reduced shear resistance. The basic cause responsible for the lique-
faction of saturated sands is the build-up of excess pore water pressure due to either cyclic
or shock loading of the sand. As a result, the grains of sand are compacted, with a conse-
quent transfer of stress to the pore water and a reduction of stress on the sand grains.
If drainage cannot take place, then the decrease in volume of the grains causes an increase
in pore water pressure. If the pore water pressure builds up to the point where it is the same
as the overburden pressure, then the effective stress is reduced to zero and the sand loses
strength with a liquefied state developing. In loose sands the pore water pressure can
increase rapidly to the value of the overburden or confining pressure. If the sand undergoes
more or less unlimited deformation without mobilizing any notable resistance to deformation,
then it can be described as having liquefied. However, Norris et al. (1998) pointed out that
a loose sand does not lose all strength during liquefaction. Loose sands at low confining
pressure, and medium and dense sands undergo only limited deformation due to dilation
once initial liquefaction has occurred. Such response is referred to as ranging from
limited liquefaction (in the case of loose and medium dense sands at low confining pressure)
to dilative behaviour (in dense sands).
Silts and Loess
The grains in a deposit of silt often are rounded with smooth outlines. This influences their
degree of packing. The latter, however, is more dependent on the grain size distribution within
a silt deposit, uniformly sorted deposits not being able to achieve such close packing as those
in which there is a range of grain size. This, in turn, influences the porosity and void ratio
values, as well as bulk and dry densities (Table 5.8).
Dilatancy is characteristic of fine sands and silts. The environment is all important for the
development of dilatancy since conditions must be such that expansion can take place. What
is more, it has been suggested that the soil particles must be well wetted, and it appears that
certain electrolytes exercise a dispersing effect, thereby aiding dilatancy. The moisture con-
tent at which a number of fine sands and silts from British formations become dilatant usually
varies between 16 and 35%.
213
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Consolidation of silt is influenced by grain size, particularly the size of the clay fraction, poros-
ity and natural moisture content. Primary consolidation may account for over 75% of total
consolidation. In addition, settlement may continue for several months after construction is
completed because the rate at which water can drain from the voids under the influence of
applied stress is slow.
The angle of shearing resistance decreases with increasing void ratio. It also is dependent
on the plasticity index, grain interlocking and density.
Most loess is of aeolian origin. Wind-blown deposits of loess are characterized by a lack of
stratification and uniform sorting, and occur as blanket deposits. Loess also is a remarkably
uniform soil in terms of its dominant minerals. In other words, loess deposits have similar
grain size distribution and mineral composition, as well as open texture, low degree of satu-
ration, and bonding of grains that is not resistant to water. The fabric of loess takes the form
of a loose skeleton built of grains (generally quartz) and micro-aggregates (assemblages of
clay or clay and silty clay particles). The silt-sized particles are sub-angular and sub-rounded,
and separate from each other, being connected by bonds and bridges, with uniformly distrib-
uted pores. The bridges are formed of clay-sized materials, be they clay minerals, fine quartz,
feldspar or calcite. These clay-sized materials also occur as coatings to grains. Silica and
iron oxide may be concentrated as cement at grain contacts, and amorphous overgrowths
of silica occur on grains of quartz and feldspar. As silt-sized particles are not in contact, the
mechanical behaviour of loess is governed by the structure and quality of the bonds.
Loess may exhibit sub-vertical columnar jointing. In addition, pipe systems may be developed
in loess soils. Extensive pipe systems and sinkholes are present in some loess and have
been referred to a loess karst. Pipes tend to develop by weathering and widening that takes
place along the joint systems in loess. The depths to which pipes develop may be inhibited
by changes in permeability associated with the occurrence of palaeosols.
Loess, as noted earlier, owes its engineering characteristics largely to the way in which it was
deposited since this gives it a metastable structure, in that initially the particles are loosely
packed. The porosity of the structure is enhanced by the presence of fossil root-holes. The
latter are lined with carbonate cement, which helps bind the grains together. However, the
chief binder is usually the clay matrix. On wetting, the clay bond in many loess soils becomes
soft, which leads to the collapse of the metastable structure. The breakdown of the soil
structure occurs under its own weight.
Loess deposits generally consist of 50–90% particles of silt size. In fact, sandy, silty and
clayey loess can be distinguished (Fig. 5.2; Table 5.10). The range of dry density is very low
to low (e.g. in Chinese loess, it may vary from 1.4 to 1.5 Mg m- 3). The low density is reflected
214
Chapter 5
Figure 5.2
Particle size distribution of Missouri River Basin loess.
Table 5.10. Some geotechnical properties of loess soils
Shaansi Province, China*
Lanzhow Czechos- South
Sandy Clayey Province, lovakia, Polish
Property loess loess China+ near Prague† Uplands**
Natural moisture 9–13 13–20 11–10 21 3–26
content (%)
Specific gravity 2.66–2.7
Bulk density (Mg m- 3) 1.59–1.68 1.4–1.85 1.54–2.12
Dry density (Mg m- 3) 1.4–1.5 1.46–1.73
Void ratio 0.8–0.92 0.76–1.11 1.05
Porosity (%) 44–50 35–46
Grain-size
distribution (%)
Sand 20.5–35.2 12–15 20–24
Silt 54.8–69.0 64–70 57–65
Clay 8.0–15.5 17–24 16–21
Plastic limit (%) 10–14 20
Liquid limit (%) 26–28 30–31 27–30 36
Plasticity index (%) 8–10 11–12 10–14 16
Activity 1.32
Coefficient of 0.007– 0.003– 0.006–0.011 0.0002–
collapsibility 0.016 0.023 0.06
Angle of friction 7–36∞
*From Lin and Wang (1988).
+From Tan (1988).
†From Feda (1988).
**From Grabowska-Olszewska (1988).
215
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in the void ratio and porosity. In the case of some Chinese loess, the void ratio varies from
0.81 to 0.89 and the porosity from 45–47%. Lutenegger and Hallberg (1988) observed that
the bulk densities of unstable loess (such as the Peorian Loess, United States), tend to range
between 1.34 and 1.55 Mg m- 3. If this material is wetted or consolidated (or reworked), the
density increases, sometimes to as high as 1.6 Mg m- 3(Clevenger, 1958).
The liquid limit of loess averages about 30% (exceptionally, liquid limits as high as 45% have
been recorded), and their plasticity index ranges from about 4 to 9%, but averages 6%. As
far as their angle of shearing resistance is concerned, this usually varies from 30 to 34∞.
Loess deposits are better drained (their permeability ranges from 10- 5to 10- 7m s- 1) than are
true silts because of the fossil root-holes. As would be expected, their permeability is appre-
ciably higher in the vertical than in the horizontal direction.
Normally, loess possesses a high shearing resistance and can carry high loadings without
significant settlement when natural moisture contents are low. For instance, moisture con-
tents of undisturbed loess are generally around 10%, and the supporting capacity of loess at
this moisture content is high. However, the density of loess is the most important factor con-
trolling its shear strength and settlement. On wetting, large settlements and low shearing
resistance are encountered when the density of loess is below 1.30 Mg m- 3, whereas if the
density exceeds 1.45 Mg m- 3, settlement is small and shearing resistance fairly high.
Unlike silt, loess does not appear to be frost susceptible, this being due to its more perme-
able character, but it can exhibit quick conditions as with silt and it is difficult, if not impossi-
ble, to compact. Because of its porous structure, a “shrinkage” factor must be taken into
account when estimating earthwork.
Several collapse criteria have been proposed that depend on the void ratios at the liquid limit,
e , and the plastic limit, e , and the natural void ratio, e . Fookes and Best (1969) proposed
1 p o
a collapse index, i, which involved these void ratios, which is as follows:
c
e - e
i c = eo - ep (5.2)
l p
Previously, Feda (1966) had proposed the following collapse index:
m/S - PL
i = r (5.3)
c PI
in which m is the natural moisture content, S is the degree of saturation, PLis the plastic limit
r
and PIis the plasticity index. Feda also proposed that the soil must have a critical porosity of
40% or above and that an imposed load must be sufficiently high to cause structural collapse
when the soil is wetted. He suggested that if the collapse index was greater than 0.85, then
216
Chapter 5
this was indicative of metastable soils. However, Northmore et al. (1996) suggested that a
lower critical value of collapse index, that is 0.22, was more appropriate for some loess type
soils in Essex, England. The double oedometer test also can be used to assess the degree
of collapsibility. The test involves loading an undisturbed specimen at natural moisture con-
tent up to a given load. At this point, the specimen is flooded and the resulting collapse strain,
if any, is recorded. Then, the specimen is subjected to further loading. The total consolidation
upon flooding can be described in terms of the coefficient of collapsibility, C , given as:
col
C =D h/h
col
D e
= (5.4)
1+e
in which D his the change in height of the specimen after flooding, his the height of the spec-
imen before flooding, D e is the change in void ratio of the specimen upon flooding and e is
the void ratio of the specimen prior to flooding. Table 5.11 provides an indication of the poten-
tial severity of collapse. This table indicates that those soils that undergo more than 1%
collapse can be regarded as metastable. However, in China a figure of 1.5% is taken (Lin
and Wang, 1988), and, in the United States, values exceeding 2% are regarded as indicative
of soils susceptible to collapse (Lutenegger and Hallberg, 1988).
Clay Deposits
Clay deposits are composed principally of fine quartz and clay minerals. The three major clay
minerals are kaolinite, illite and montmorillonite. Both kaolinite and illite have non-expansive
lattices, whereas that of montmorillonite is expansive. In other words, montmorillonite is char-
acterized by its ability to swell and by its notable cation exchange properties.
The microstructure of clay soils is governed largely by the clay minerals present and the forces
acting between them. Because of the complex electrochemistry of clay minerals, the spatial
arrangement of newly sedimented particles is influenced by the composition of the water in which
deposition takes place. Single clay mineral platelets may associate in an edge-to-edge (EE),
edge-to-face (EF), face-to-face (FF) or random type of arrangement, depending on the
Table 5.11. Collapse percentage as an indication of potential problems
Collapse (%) Severity of problem
0–1 No problem
1–5 Moderate trouble
5–10 Trouble
10–20 Severe trouble
Above 20 Very severe trouble
217
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
interparticle balance between the forces of attraction and repulsion, and the amount or absence
of turbulence in the water in which deposition occurs. The original microstructure of a clay deposit
is modified subsequently by overburden pressures due to burial, which bring about consolida-
tion. Consolidation tends to produce a preferred orientation with the degree of reorientation of
clay particles being related to both the intensity of stress and the electrochemical environment,
dispersion encouraging and flocculation discouraging clay particle parallelism. These microstruc-
tures are destroyed by weathering, gradually disappearing as the degree of weathering intensi-
fies, as Coulthard and Bell (1993) found in the Lower Lias Clay in Gloucester, England.
The principal minerals in a deposit of clay tend to influence its index properties. For example,
the plasticity of clay soil is influenced by the amount of its clay fraction and the type of clay min-
erals present since clay minerals influence the amount of attracted water held in a soil. Burnett
and Fookes (1974), for instance, demonstrated that the clay fraction of the London Clay in the
London Basin increases eastwards that, in turn, leads to an increase in its plasticity.Similarly,
Bell (1994b) showed that high plasticity in the Speeton Clay, East Yorkshire, was influenced
by the proportion of clay fraction present. Subsequently, Marsh and Greenwood (1995) noted
that as the calcite content in the Gault Clay, England, increased, the liquid limit decreased.
On the other hand, it would appear that there is only a general correlation between the clay
mineral composition of a deposit and its activity. In other words, kaolinitic and illitic clays
usually are inactive, whereas montmorillonitic clays range from inactive to active. Usually, active
clays have a relatively high water-holding capacity and a high cation exchange capacity.They
also are highly thixotropic, have low permeability and have low resistance to shear. The activity
of clay was defined by Skempton (1953) as:
Plasticityindex
Activity= (5.5)
Percentagebymassfinerthan0.002mm
He suggested three classes of activity, namely, active, normal and inactive, which he further
subdivided into five groups as follows:
1. Inactive with activity less than 0.5,
2. Inactive with activity range 0.5–0.75,
3. Normal with activity range 0.75–1.25,
4. Active with activity range 1.25–2,
5. Active with activity greater than 2.
Particle size analyses of clay deposits indicate that they can contain appreciable fractions of
grains larger than 0.002 mm. For example, Forster et al. (1994) reported that the clay fraction
in the Gault Clay lay between 15 and 65% and that particles larger than 2 mm constituted less
than 1%. The proportions of clay, silt and sand size material in the Claygate Beds and Bagshot
Beds of south Essex, England, as recorded by Northmore et al. (1999), are given in Table 5.12.
218
Chapter 5
Table 5.12. Particle size distribution in the clay deposits of the Claygate Beds and Bagshot
Beds of South Essex (after Northmore et al.,1999)
Clay (%) Silt (%) Sand (%)
Upper Claygate 50–57 40–42 3–8
Beds 53.5 41 5.5
Middle Claygate 51–54 36–46 3–10
Beds 52.8 42 5.2
Lower Claygate 52–61 36–45 2–3
Beds 55.2 42.3 2.5
Bagshot 53–69 28–41 1–15
Beds 61.2 35.2 3.6
The undrained shear strength is related to the amount and type of clay minerals present in a
clay deposit, together with the presence of cementing agents. In particular, strength is reduced
with increasing content of mixed-layer clay and montmorillonite in the clay fraction. The
increasing presence of cementing agents, especially calcite, enhances the strength of the clay.
Geological age also has an influence on the engineering behaviour of a clay deposit. In par-
ticular, the porosity, moisture content and plasticity normally decrease in value with increasing
depth and thereby age, whereas the strength and elastic modulus increase.
The engineering performance of clay deposits also is affected by the total moisture content
and by the energy with which this moisture is held. For instance, the moisture content influ-
ences their consistency and strength, and the energy with which moisture is held influences
their volume change characteristics. Indeed, one of the most notable characteristics of clays
from the engineering point of view is their susceptibility to slow volume changes that can occur
independently of loading due to swelling or shrinkage. Differences in the period and magni-
tude of precipitation and evapotransportation are the major factors influencing the swell–shrink
response of active clay beneath a structure. These volume changes can give rise to ground
movements that may result in damage to buildings. Low-rise buildings are particularly vulner-
able to such ground movements since they generally do not have sufficient weight or strength
to resist (Bell and Maud, 1995). These soils also represent a problem when they are encoun-
tered in road construction, and shrinkage settlement of embankments composed of such clays
can lead to cracking and breaking up of the roads they support.
Grim (1952) distinguished two modes of swelling in clay soils, namely, intercrystalline and
intracrystalline swelling. Intercrystalline swelling takes place when the uptake of moisture is
restricted to the external crystal surfaces and the void spaces between the crystals.
Intracrystalline swelling, on the other hand, is characteristic of the smectite family of clay
219
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 5.3
Use of the activity chart to estimate of the degree of expansiveness of some clay soils from Natal, South Africa (from Bell and
Maud, 1995).
minerals, of montmorillonite in particular. The individual molecular layers that make up a crys-
tal of montmorillonite are weakly bonded, so that on wetting moisture enters not only between
the crystals but also between the unit layers that comprise the crystals. Generally, kaolinite
has the smallest swelling capacity of the clay minerals, and nearly all of its swelling is of the
intercrystalline type. Illite may swell by up to 15% but intermixed illite and montmorillonite may
swell some 60–100%. Swelling in Ca montmorillonite is very much less than in the Na variety, it
ranges from about 50–100%. Swelling in Na montmorillonite can amount to 2000% of the
original volume, the clay then having formed a gel.
The maximum movement due to swelling beneath a building founded on expansive clay can
be obtained from the following expression:
(PI- 10)
Swell(%)= log S/p (5.6)
10 10
where PIis the plasticity index, Sis the soil suction at the time of construction (in kPa) and p
is the overburden plus foundation pressure acting on each layer of soil (in kPa). One of the
most widely used soil properties to predict swell potential is the activity of clay (Fig. 5.3).
The United States Army Engineers Waterways Experimental Station (USAEWES) classifica-
tion of potential swell (Table 5.13) is based on the liquid limit (LL), plasticity index (PI) and
initial (in situ) suction (S). The latter is measured in the field by a psychrometer.
i
220
Chapter 5
Table 5.13. USAEWES classification of swell potential (After Snethan et al., 1977). With
kindpermission of the USAEWES
Initial (in situ) Potential
Liquid limit (%) Plastic limit (%) suction (kPa) swell (%) Classification
Less than 50 Less than 25 Less than 145 Less than 0.5 Low
50–60 25–35 145–385 0.5–1.5 Marginal
Over 60 Over 35 Over 385 Over 1.5 High
The volume change that occurs due to evapotranspiration from a clay soil can be predicted
conservatively by assuming the lower limit of the soil moisture content to be the shrinkage
limit. Desiccation beyond this value cannot bring about further volume change. Transpiration
from vegetative cover is a major cause of water loss from soils in semi-arid regions. Indeed,
the distribution of soil suction in the soil is controlled primarily by transpiration from vegeta-
tion. The maximum soil suction that can be developed is governed by the ability of vegeta-
tion to extract moisture from the soil. The point, at which moisture is no longer available to
plants is termed the permanent wilting point, and this corresponds to a pF value of about 4.2.
The complete depth of active clay profiles usually does not become fully saturated during
the wet season in semi-arid regions. Changes in soil suction may be expected over a depth
of some 2.0 m between the wet and dry seasons. Swelling movements of over 350 mm
have been reported for expansive clays in South Africa by Williams and Pidgeon (1983), and
similar movements in similar soils have occurred in Texas.
The moisture characteristic (moisture content versus soil suction) of a soil provides valuable
data concerning the moisture contents corresponding to the field capacity (defined in terms
of soil suction, this is a pF value of about 2.0) and the permanent wilting point (pF of 4.2 and
above), as well as the rate at which changes in soil suction take place with variations in
moisture content. This enables an assessment to be made of the range of soil suction and
moisture content that is likely to occur in the zone affected by seasonal changes in climate.
The extent to which the vegetation is able to increase the suction to the level associated with
the shrinkage limit is important. In fact, the moisture content at the wilting point exceeds that
of the shrinkage limit in soils with a high content of clay and is less in those possessing low
clay contents. This explains why settlement resulting from the desiccating effects of trees is
more notable in low to moderately expansive soils than in expansive ones. When vegetation
is cleared from a site, its desiccating effect also is removed. Hence, the subsequent regain
of moisture by clay soils leads to them swelling.
Desiccation cracks may extend to depths of 2 m in expansive clays and gape up to 150 mm. The
suction pressure associated with the onset of cracking is approximately pF 4.6. The presence of
221
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
desiccation cracks enhances evaporation from the soil. Such cracks lead to a variable develop-
ment of suction pressure, the highest suction occurring nearest the cracks. This, in turn, influ-
ences the preconsolidation pressure as well as the shear strength. It has been claimed that the
effect of desiccation on clay soils is similar to that of heavy overconsolidation.
Sridharan and Allam (1982), with reference to arid and semi-arid regions, found that repeated
wetting and drying of clay soils can bring about aggregation of soil particles and cementation
by compounds of Ca, Mg, Al and Fe. This enhances the permeability of the clays and increases
their resistance to compression. Furthermore, interparticle desiccation bonding increases the
shear strength, the aggregations offering higher resistance to stress. Indeed, depending on
the degree of bonding, the expansiveness of an expansive clay soil may be reduced or it may
even behave as a non-expansive soil.
Volume changes in clays also occur as a result of loading and unloading, which bring about
consolidation and heave, respectively. When a load is applied to a clay soil, its volume is
reduced, this principally being due to a reduction in the void ratio (Burland, 1990). If such a
soil is saturated, then the load is carried initially by the pore water that causes a pressure, the
hydrostatic excess pressure, to develop. The excess pressure of the pore water is dissipated
at a rate that depends on the permeability of the soil mass, and the load is transferred even-
tually to the soil structure. The change in volume during consolidation is equal to the volume
of the pore water expelled and corresponds to the change in void ratio of the soil. In other
words, primary consolidation is brought about by a reduction in the void ratio. In clay soils,
because of their low permeability, the rate of consolidation is slow. Further consolidation may
occur due to a rearrangement of the soil particles. This secondary consolidation is usually
much less significant. The compressibility of a clay soil is related to its geological history, that
is, to whether it is normally consolidated or overconsolidated. A normally consolidated clay is
one that at no time in its geological history has been subject to vertical pressure greater than
its existing overburden pressure, whereas an overconsolidated clay has.
The compressibility of a clay soil can be expressed in terms of the compression index, C, or
c
the coefficient of volume compressibility, m. The compression index tends to be applied to
v
normally consolidated clays. The value of C for fine soils ranges from 0.075 for sandy clays
c
to more than 1.0 for highly colloidal bentonic clays. An approximation of the degree of com-
pressibility is given in Table 5.14a. It can be seen that the compressibility index increases with
increasing clay content and so with increasing liquid limit. The coefficient of volume compress-
ibility is defined as the volume change per unit volume per unit increase in load. The value
of m for a given soil depends on the stress range over which it is determined. Anon, (1990a)
v
recommended that it should be calculated for a pressure increment of 100 kPa in excess
of the effective overburden pressure on the soil at the depth from which the sample was taken.
Some typical values of m are given in Table 5.14b.
v
222
Chapter 5
Table 5.14. Range of compressibility of fine soils
(a) Compressibility index
Soil type Range (C ) Degree of compressibility
c
Soft clay Over 0.3 Very high
Clay 0.3–0.15 High
Silt 0.15–0.075 Medium
Sandy clay Less than 0.075 Low
(b) Some typical values of coefficient of volume compressibility
Coefficient of volume
compressibility
(m2MN- 1) Degree of compressibility Soil types
Above 1.5 Very high Organic alluvial clays and peats
0.3–1.5 High Normally consolidated alluvial clays
0.1–0.3 Medium Varved and laminated clays
Firm to stiff clays
0.05–0.1 Low Very stiff or hard clays Tills
Below 0.05 Very low Heavily overconsolidated tills
When an excavation is made in clay with weak diagenetic bonds, elastic rebound causes
immediate dissipation of some stored strain energy in the soil. However, part of the strain
energy is retained due to the restriction on lateral straining in the plane parallel to the ground
surface. The lateral effective stress either remains constant or decreases as a result of plas-
tic deformation of the clay as time passes. This plastic deformation can result in significant
time-dependent vertical heaving. However, creep of weakly bonded soils is not a common
cause of heaving in excavations.
Overconsolidated clay is considerably stronger at a given pressure than normally consoli-
dated clay, and it tends to dilate during shear, whereas normally consolidated clay consoli-
dates (Burland, 1990). Hence, when overconsolidated clay is sheared under undrained
conditions, negative pore water pressures are induced, the effective strength is increased,
and the undrained strength is much higher than the drained strength, (the exact opposite to
normally consolidated clay). When the negative pore water pressure gradually dissipates, the
strength falls as much as 60 or 80% to the drained strength.
In 1964, Skempton observed that when clay is strained, it develops an increasing resistance
(strength), but that under a given effective pressure, the resistance offered is limited, the max-
imum value corresponding to the peak strength. If testing is continued beyond the peak
223
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
strength, then as displacement increases, the resistance decreases, again to a limiting value
that is termed the residual strength. Skempton noted that in moving from peak to residual
strength, cohesion falls to almost, or actually, zero and the angle of shearing resistance is
reduced to a few degrees (it may be as much as 10∞in some clays). He explained the drop in
strength that occurred in overconsolidated clay as due to its expansion on passing peak
strength and associated increasing water content on the one hand. On the other, he maintained
that platey clay minerals became orientated in the direction of shear and thereby offered less
resistance. Failure occurs once the stress on clay exceeds its peak strength and, as failure
progresses, the strength of the clay along the shear surface is reduced to the residual value.
It was suggested that under a given effective pressure, the residual strength of clay is the
same whether it is normal, or overconsolidated (Fig. 5.4). In other words, the residual shear
strength of clay is independent of its post-depositional history, unlike the peak undrained
shear strength that is controlled by the history of consolidation as well as diagenesis.
Furthermore, the value of residual shear strength, f ¢ , decreases as the amount of clay frac-
r
tion increases in a deposit. In this context, not only is the proportion of detrital minerals impor-
tant but so is that of the diagenetic minerals. The latter influence the degree of induration
of a deposit of clay, and the value of f ¢ can fall significantly as the ratio of clay minerals to
r
detrital and diagenetic minerals increases.
The shear strength of undisturbed clay is frequently found to be greater than that obtained
when it is remoulded and tested under the same conditions and at the same water content
levels. The ratio of the undisturbed to the remoulded strength at the same moisture content
is termed the sensitivity of clay. Skempton and Northey (1952) proposed six grades of
Figure 5.4
Peak strength and residual strength of normally consolidated (N–C) and overconsolidated (O–C) clay soils (after Skempton, 1964).
With kind permission of the Institution of Civil Engineers.
224
Chapter 5
sensitivity, namely, insensitive clays (under 1), low sensitive clays (1–2), medium sensitive
clays (2–4), sensitive clays (4–8), extra-sensitive clays (8–16) and quick clay (over 16).
Clays with high sensitivity values have little or no strength after being disturbed. Indeed, if
they suffer disturbance, this may cause an initially fairly strong material to behave as a vis-
cous fluid. Any subsequent gain in strength due to thixotropic hardening does not exceed a
small fraction of its original value. Sensitive clays generally possess high moisture contents,
frequently with liquidity indices well in excess of unity. A sharp increase in moisture content
may cause a great increase in sensitivity, sometimes with disastrous results. Heavily over-
consolidated clays are insensitive.
Fissures play an extremely important role in the failure mechanism of overconsolidated clays.
For example, the strength along fissures in clay is only slightly higher than the residual
strength of the intact clay. Hence, it can be concluded that the upper limit of the strength of fis-
sured clay is represented by its intact strength, whereas the lower limit corresponds to the
strength along the fissures. The operational strength, which is somewhere between the two,
however, is often significantly higher than the fissure strength. In addition to allowing clay to
soften, fissures allow concentrations of shear stress that locally exceed the peak strength of
clay, thereby giving rise to progressive failure. Under stress, the fissures in clay seem to prop-
agate and coalesce in a complex manner. The ingress of water into fissures means that the
pore water pressure in the clay concerned increases, which, in turn, means that its strength is
reduced. Fissures in normally consolidated clays have no significant practical consequences.
The greatest variation in the engineering properties of clays can be attributed to the degree of
weathering that they have undergone (Fig. 5.5). For instance, consolidation of a clay deposit
gives rise to an anisotropic texture due to the rotation of the platey minerals. Secondly, diage-
nesis bonds particles together either by the development of cement, the intergrowth of adja-
cent grains or the action of van der Waals charges that are operative at very small grain
separations. Weathering reverses these processes, altering the anisotropic structure and
destroying or weakening interparticle bonding (Coulthard and Bell, 1993). Ultimately, weather-
ing, through the destruction of interparticle bonds, leads to a clay deposit reverting to a nor-
mally consolidated, sensibly remoulded condition. Higher moisture contents are found in more
weathered clay. This progressive degrading and softening also is accompanied by reductions
in strength and deformation modulus with a general increase in plasticity. The reduction in
strength has been illustrated by Cripps and Taylor (1981), who quoted the strength parame-
ters for brown (weathered) and blue (unweathered) London Clay, as given in Table 5.15.
These values indicate that the undrained shear strength, t , is reduced by approximately half
u
and that the effective cohesion, c¢, can suffer significant reduction on weathering. The effec-
tive angle of shearing resistance also is reduced and, at f = 20∞, the value corresponds to
a fully softened condition.
225
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 5.5
Geotechnical profile of the Lower Lias Clay at Blockley, Gloucestershire, England. Ameasure of the average orientation of clay
particles seen in a thin section beneath the petrological microscope is afforded by the birefringence ratio (i.e. the ratio between
the minimum and maximum light transmitted under crossed polars). This ratio varies between 0 for perfect parallel orientation
to 1 for perfect random orientation. With increasing weathering, the birefringence ratio increases, indicating that the fabric of
the clay becomes more disordered as the ground surface is approached. Weathering of pyrite (FeS) produces sulphate and
2
sulphuric acid. The latter reacts with calcium carbonate. The oxidation of iron compounds tends to increase as the surface is
approached, which leads to increasing shear strength. PL=plastic limit; LL=liquid limit (after Coulthard and Bell, 1993).
226
Chapter 5
Table 5.15. Strength of weathered (brown) and unweathered (blue)
London Clay (after Cripps and Taylor, 1981)
Parameter Brown Blue
t (kPa) 100–175 120–250
u
c¢ (kPa) 0–31 35–252
j∞ 20–23 25–29
Tropical Soils
In humid tropical regions, weathering of rock is more intense and extends to greater depths
than in other parts of the world. Residual soils develop in place as a consequence of weath-
ering, primarily chemical weathering (Rahardjo et al., 2004). Consequently, climate (temper-
ature and rainfall), parent rock, water movement (drainage and topography), age and
vegetation cover are responsible for the development of the soil profile.
Ferruginous and aluminous clay soils are frequent products of weathering in tropical lati-
tudes. They are characterized by the presence of iron and aluminium oxides and hydroxides.
These compounds, especially those of iron, are responsible for the red, brown and yellow
colours of the soils. The soils may be fine grained, or they may contain nodules or concre-
tions. Concretions occur in the matrix where there are higher concentrations of oxides in the
soil. More extensive accumulations of oxides give rise to laterite.
Laterite is a residual ferruginous clay-like deposit that generally occurs below a hardened fer-
ruginous crust or hardpan (Charman, 1988). The ratios of silica (SiO ) to sesquioxides (Fe O ,
2 2 3
Al O ) in laterites usually are less than 1.33, those ratios between 1.33 and 2.0 are indicative
2 3
of lateritic soils, and those greater than 2.0 are indicative of non-lateritic types. During drier
periods, the water table is lowered. The small amount of iron that has been mobilized in the
ferrous state by the groundwater is then oxidized, forming hematite, or goethite if hydrated.
The movement of the water table leads to the gradual accumulation of iron oxides at a given
horizon in the soil profile. A cemented layer of laterite is formed that may be a continuous or
honeycombed mass, or nodules may be formed, as in laterite gravel. Concretionary layers
often are developed near the surface in lowland areas because of the high water table.
Laterite hardens on exposure to air. Hardening may be due to a change in the hydration of
iron and aluminium oxides.
Laterite commonly contains all size fractions from clay to gravel and sometimes even larger
material (Fig. 5.6). Usually, at or near the surface, the liquid limit of laterite does not exceed
60% and the plasticity index is less than 30%. Consequently, laterite is of low to medium
227
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 5.6
Grading curves of laterite (after Madu, 1977). With kind permission of Elsevier.
plasticity. The activity of laterite may vary between 0.5 and 1.75. Some values of common
properties of laterite are given in Table 5.16.
Lateritic soils, particularly where they are mature, furnish a good bearing stratum (Blight, 1990).
The hardened crust has a low compressibility and, therefore, settlement is likely to be negligi-
ble. In such instances, however, the strength of the soil may decrease with increasing depth.
Red earths or latosols are residual ferruginous soils in which oxidation readily occurs. Most
such soils appear to have been derived from the first cycle of weathering of the parent material.
Table 5.16. Some common properties of laterites (after Madu, 1977)
Moisture content (%) 10–49
Liquid limit (%) 33–90
Plastic limit (%) 13–31
Clay fraction 15–45
Dry unit weight (kN m- 3) 15.2–17.3
Cohesion (kPa) 466–782
Angle of friction (∞) 28–35
Unconfined compressive strength (kPa) 220–825
Compression index 0.0186
Coefficient of consolidation (m2a- 1) 262
Young’s modulus (kPa) 5.63 ¥ 104
228
Chapter 5
They differ from laterite in that they behave as a clay soil and do not possess strong
concretions. They, however, do grade into laterite.
Black clays typically are developed on poorly drained plains in regions with well-defined wet
and dry seasons, where the annual rainfall is not less than 1250 mm. Generally, the clay frac-
tion in these soils exceeds 50%, silty material varying between 20 and 40% and sand forming
the remainder. The organic content usually is less than 2%. The liquid limits of black clays may
range between 50 and 100%, with plasticity indices of between 25 and 70%. The shrinkage
limit frequently is around 10–12%. Montmorillonite commonly is present in the clay fraction and
is the chief factor determining the behaviour of these clays. For instance, they undergo appre-
ciable volume changes on wetting and drying due to the montmorillonite content. These
volume changes, however, tend to be confined to an upper critical zone of the soil, which
frequently is less than 1.5 m thick. Below this, the moisture content remains more or less the
same, for instance, around 25%.
Dispersive Soils
Dispersion occurs in soils when the repulsive forces between clay particles exceed the attrac-
tive forces, thus bringing about deflocculation so that, in the presence of relatively pure water,
the particles repel each other to form colloidal suspensions. In non-dispersive soil, there is a
definite threshold velocity below which flowing water causes no erosion. The individual parti-
cles cling to each other and are removed by water flowing with a certain erosive energy. By
contrast, there is no threshold velocity for dispersive soil, the colloidal clay particles go into
suspension even in quiet water and, therefore, these soils are highly susceptible to erosion
and piping. Dispersive soils contain a moderate to high content of clay material but there are
no significant differences in the clay fractions of dispersive and non-dispersive soils, except
that soils with less than 10% clay particles may not have enough colloids to support disper-
sive piping. Dispersive soils contain a higher content of dissolved sodium (up to 12%) in their
pore water than do ordinary soils. The clay particles in soils with high salt contents exist as
aggregates and coatings around silt and sand particles, and the soil is flocculated. Dispersive
soils generally occur in semi-arid regions where the annual rainfall is less than 860 mm (Bell
and Walker, 2000).
For a given eroding fluid, the boundary between the flocculated and deflocculated states
depends on the value of the sodium adsorption ratio. The sodium adsorption ratio, SAR, is
used to quantify the role of sodium where free salts are present in the pore water and is
defined as:
Na
SAR=
(5.7)
0.5(Ca+Mg)
229
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
with units expressed in milli-equivalents per litre of the saturated extract. There is a relationship
between the electrolyte concentration of the pore water and the exchangeable ions in the
adsorbed layers of clay particles. This relationship is dependent on pH value and also may
be influenced by the type of clay minerals present. Hence, it is not necessarily constant.
Gerber and Harmse (1987) considered a SAR value greater than 10 as indicative of disper-
sive soils, between 6 and 10 as intermediate and less than 6 as nondispersive. However,
Aitchison and Wood (1965) regarded soils in which the SAR exceeded 2 as dispersive.
Dispersive erosion depends on the mineralogy and chemistry of soil on the one hand, and the
dissolved salts in the pore and eroding water on the other. The presence of exchangeable
sodium is the main chemical factor contributing towards dispersive clay behaviour. This is
expressed in terms of the exchangeable sodium percentage, ESP:
exchangeablesodium
ESP= ¥ 100 (5.8)
cationexchangecapaccity
where the units are given in meq/100 g of dry soil. Above a threshold value of ESP of 10,
soils have their free salts leached by seepage of relatively pure water and are prone to
dispersion. Soils with ESP values above 15% are highly dispersive, according to Gerber and
Harmse (1987). On the other hand, those soils with low cation exchange values (15 meq/100 g
of clay) are non-dispersive at ESP values of 6% or below. Soils with high cation exchange
capacity values and a plasticity index greater than 35% swell to such an extent that disper-
sion is not significant. High ESP values and piping potential may exist in soils in which the
clay fraction is composed largely of smectitic and other 2:1 clays. Some illitic soils are highly
dispersive. High values of ESP and high dispersibility are generally not common in clays
composed largely of kaolinite.
Another property that has been claimed to govern the susceptibility of clayey soils to disper-
sion is the total content of dissolved salts, TDS, in the pore water. In other words, the lower
the content of dissolved salts in the pore water, the greater the susceptibility of sodium-
saturated clays to dispersion. Sherard et al. (1976) regarded the total dissolved salts for this
specific purpose as the total content of calcium, magnesium, sodium and potassium in
milli-equivalents per litre. They designed a chart in which sodium content was expressed as
a percentage of TDS and was plotted against TDS to determine the dispersivity of soils
(Fig. 5.7a). However, Craft and Acciardi (1984) showed that this chart had poor overall agree-
ment with the results of physical tests. Furthermore, Bell and Maud (1994) showed that the
use of the dispersivity chart to distinguish dispersive soils had not proved reliable in Natal,
South Africa. There, the determination of dispersive potential frequently involves the use of a
chart designed by Gerber and Harmse (1987) that plots ESP against cation exchange capacity,
CEC (Fig. 5.7b).
230
Chapter 5
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7
(a) Potential dispersivity chart of Sherard et al., 1976, with some examples of soils from Natal, South Africa (after Bell and
Walker, 2000). (b) Chart for classification of soils to determine their dispersivity, developed by Gerber and von Harmse (1987),
with some examples of soils from Natal, South Africa (after Bell and Walker, 2000). The dispersivities plotted in (a) and (b) were
determined by a rating system developed by a Bell and Walker.
231
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Damage due to internal erosion of dispersive soil leads to the formation of pipes and internal
cavities within slopes. Piping is initiated by dispersion of clay particles along desiccation
cracks, fissures and root-holes. Piping has led to the failure of earth dams built with dispersive
soil (Fig. 5.8). Indications of piping take the form of small leakages of muddy-coloured water
after initial filling of the reservoir. In addition, severe erosion damage forming deep gullies
occurs on embankments after rainfall. Fortunately, when dispersive soils are treated with lime,
they are transformed to a non-dispersive state if the lime is mixed thoroughly into the soil.
Soils of Arid Regions
Most arid deposits consist of the products of physical weathering of bedrock formations.
Weathering activity tends to be dominated by the physical breakdown of rock masses into
poorly sorted assemblages of fragments ranging in size down to silts. Many of the deposits
within alluvial plains and covering hillsides are poorly consolidated. As such, they may
undergo large settlements, especially if subjected to vibration due to earthquakes or cyclic
loading. Some gravels may consist of relatively weak, low-durability materials. Many arid
areas are dominated by the presence of large masses of sand. Depending on the rate of
Figure 5.8
Failure of a small dam constructed of dispersive soil, near Ramsgate, Natal, South Africa.
232
Chapter 5
supply of sand, the wind speed, direction, frequency and constancy and the nature of the
ground surface, sand may be transported and/or deposited in mobile or static dunes. For the
most part, aeolian sands are poorly (uniformly) graded. In the absence of downward leach-
ing, surface deposits become contaminated with precipitated salts, particularly sulphates
and chlorides. Alluvial plain deposits often contain gypsum particles and cement, and also
fragments of weak weathered rock and clay.
In arid regions, sabkha conditions commonly develop in low-lying coastal zones and inland
plains with shallow water tables. These are extensive saline flats that are underlain by sand,
silt or clay and often are encrusted with salt. Highly developed sabkhas tend to retain a greater
proportion of soil moisture than moderately developed sabkhas. Within coastal sabkhas, the
dominant minerals are calcite (CaCO ), dolomite [(Ca,Mg)CO ] and gypsum (CaSO .nH O),
3 3 4 2
with lesser amounts of anhydrite (CaSO ), magnesite (MgCO ), halite (NaCl) and carnalite
4 3
(KCl.MgCl .6H O), together with various other sulphates and chlorides (James and Little,
2 2
1994). Highly saline groundwater may contain up to 23% sodium chloride and occur close to
ground level. In fact, the sodium chloride content of groundwater can be high enough to
represent a corrosion hazard.
Minerals that are precipitated from groundwater in arid deposits also have high solution rates,
so that flowing groundwater may lead to the development of solution features. Problems such
as increased permeability, reduced density and settlement are liable to be associated with
engineering works or natural processes that result in a decrease in the salt concentration of
groundwater. Changes in the state of hydration of minerals, such as swelling clays and cal-
cium sulphate, also cause significant volume changes in soils. In particular, low-density sands
that are cemented with soluble salts such as sodium chloride are vulnerable to salt removal by
dissolution by freshwater, leading to settlement. Hence, rainstorms and burst water mains
present a hazard, as does watering of grassed areas and flower beds. The latter should be
controlled, and major structures should be protected by drainage measures to reduce the risks
associated with rainstorms or burst water pipes. In the case of inland sabkhas, the minerals
precipitated within the soil are much more variable than those of coastal sabkhas since they
depend on the composition of local groundwater.
Sabkha soils frequently are characterized by low strength. Furthermore, some surface clays
that are normally consolidated or lightly overconsolidated may be sensitive to highly sensitive.
The low strength is attributable to the concentrated salt solutions in sabkha brines; the severe
climatic conditions under which sabkha deposits are formed (e.g. large variations in tempera-
ture and excessive wetting–drying cycles) that can give rise to instability in sabkha soils; and
the ready solubility of some of the minerals that act as cements in these soils. As a conse-
quence, the bearing capacity of sabkha soils and their compressibility frequently do not meet
routine design requirements.
233
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
A number of silty deposits formed under arid conditions are liable to undergo considerable
volume reduction or collapse when wetted. Such metastability arises due to the loss of
strength of interparticle bonds, resulting from increases in water content. Thus, infiltration of
surface water, including that applied by irrigation, leakage from pipes and rise of the water
table may cause large settlements to occur.
A common feature of arid regions is the cementation of sediments by the precipitation of min-
eral matter from the groundwater. The species of salt held in solution, and also those precipi-
tated, depends on the source of the water, as well as the prevailing temperature and humidity
conditions. The process may lead to the development of various crusts or cretes in which
unconsolidated deposits are cemented. The most commonly precipitated material is calcium
carbonate (Netterburg, 1994). As the carbonate content increases in these soils, it first occurs
as scattered concentrations of flaky habit, then as hard concretions. Once it exceeds 60%, the
concentration becomes continuous. These deposits are referred to as calcrete (Fig. 5.9). The
calcium carbonate in calcrete profiles decreases from top to base, as generally does the hard-
ness. The development of calcrete is inhibited beyond a certain aridity since the low precipita-
tion is unable to dissolve and drain calcium carbonate towards the water table. Consequently,
in very arid climates, gypcrete may take the place of calcrete.
Figure 5.9
Calcrete in the north of Namib-Nauluft Park, Namibia.
234
Chapter 5
Tills and Other Glacially Associated Deposits
Till usually is regarded as being synonymous with boulder clay. It is deposited directly by ice,
whereas stratified drift is deposited in melt waters associated with glaciers. The character
of till deposits varies appreciably and depends on the lithology of the material from which
it was derived, on the position in which it was transported in the glacier, and on the mode of
deposition. The underlying bedrock material usually constitutes up to about 80% of basal
or lodgement tills, depending on its resistance to abrasion and plucking.
Deposits of till consist of a variable assortment of rock debris ranging from fine rock flour to boul-
ders (Hughes et al., 1998). The shape of the rock fragments found in till varies but is conditioned
largely by their initial shape at the moment of incorporation into the ice. Angular boulders are
common, their irregular sharp edges resulting from crushing. Tills may consist essentially of
sand and gravel with very little binder, alternatively they may have an excess of clay. Lenses
and pockets of sand, gravel and highly plastic clay frequently are encountered in some tills.
Argillaceous rocks, such as shales and mudstones, are abraded more easily and so produce
fine-grained tills that are richer in clay minerals and, therefore, more plastic than other tills.
Mineral composition also influences the natural moisture content, which is slightly higher in tills
containing appreciable quantities of clay minerals.
Lodgement till is plastered on to the ground beneath a moving glacier in small increments as the
basal ice melts. Because of the overlying weight of ice, such deposits are overconsolidated. Due
to abrasion and grinding, the proportion of silt and clay size material is relatively high in lodge-
ment till (e.g. the clay fraction varies from 15 to 40%). Lodgement till is commonly stiff, dense and
relatively incompressible (Sladen and Wrigley, 1983). Hence, it is practically impermeable.
Fissures frequently are present in lodgement till, especially if it is clay matrix dominated.
Ablation till accumulates on the surface of the ice when englacial debris melts out, and as the
glacier decays, the ablation till is lowered slowly to the ground. Therefore, it is normally con-
solidated. Ablation tills have a high proportion of far-travelled material and may not contain
any of the local bedrock. Because it has not been subjected to much abrasion, ablation till is
characterized by abundant large fragments that are angular and not striated, the proportion
of sand and gravel is high and clay is present only in small amounts (usually less than 10%).
Because the texture is loose, ablation till can have an extremely low in situ density. Since
ablation till consists of the load carried at the time of ablation, it usually forms a thinner
deposit than lodgement till.
The particle size distribution and fabric (stone orientation, layering, fissuring and jointing) are
among the most significant features as far as the engineering behaviour of a till is concerned.
McGown and Derbyshire (1977) therefore used the percentage of fines to distinguish
235
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
granular, well-graded and matrix-dominated tills, the boundaries being placed at 15 and 45%,
respectively.
Tills frequently are gap graded, the gap generally occurring in the sand fraction (Fig. 5.10).
Large, often very local, variations can occur in the grading of till that reflect local variations in
the formation processes, particularly the comminution processes. The range in the propor-
tions of coarse and fine fractions in tills dictates the degree to which the properties of the fine
fraction influence the properties of the composite soil. The variation in the engineering prop-
erties of the fine soil fraction is greater than that of the coarse fraction, and this often tends
to dominate the engineering behaviour of the till.
The specific gravity of till deposits often is remarkably uniform, varying from 2.77 to 2.78.
These values suggest the presence of fresh minerals in the fine fraction, that is, rock flour
rather than clay minerals. Rock flour behaves more like granular material than cohesive and
has a low plasticity. The consistency limits of tills are dependent on moisture content, grain
size distribution and the properties of the fine-grained fraction (Bell, 2002). Generally, how-
ever, the plasticity index is small and the liquid limit of tills decreases with increasing grain
size. The variations in some simple index properties with depth of the Upper Boulder Clay of
Teesside, England, are given in Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.10
Typical gradings of some Scottish tills (after McGown, 1971). With kind permission of the Geological Society.
236
Chapter 5
Figure 5.11
Variation in some simple index properties with depth of the Upper Boulder Clay of Teesside, England (after Bell, 2002).
The compressibility and consolidation of tills are determined principally by the clay content,
as is the shear strength (Table 5.17). For example, the value of compressibility index tends
to increase linearly with increasing clay content, whereas for tills of very low clay content (less
than 2%), this index remains about constant (C =0.01). The shear strength of till can range
c
from 150 kPa to over 1.5 MPa.
Fissures in till tend to be variable in character, spacing, orientation and areal extent, although
they can have a preferred orientation. Opening up and softening along these fissures gives
237
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.17. Strength of tills from Holderness (after Bell, 2002)
Unconfined compressive
strength (kPa) Sensitivity Direct shear Triaxial
Intact Remoulded c f∞ c f∞ c f∞ c¢ f∞
r r u u
1. Hessle Till
(Dimlington,
Hornsea)
Max 138 116 1.31 (L) 30 25 3 23 98 8 80 24
Min 96 74 1.10 (L) 16 16 0 13 22 5 10 13
Mean 106 96 1.19 (L) 20 24 1 20 35 7 26 25
2. Withernsea Till
(Dimlington)
Max 172 148 1.18 (L) 38 30 2 27 62 19 42 34
Min 140 122 1.15 (L) 21 20 0 18 17 5 17 16
Mean 160 136 1.16 (L) 26 24 1 21 30 9 23 25
3. Skipsea Till
(Dimlington)
Max 194 168 1.15 (L) 45 38 5 35 50 21 25 36
Min 182 154 1.08 (L) 25 20 0 19 17 10 22 24
Mean 186 164 1.13 (L) 27 26 1 25 29 12 28 30
4. Basement Till
(Dimlington)
Max 212 168 1.27 (L) 47 34 2 30 59 17 42 36
Min 163 140 1.19 (L) 23 20 0 18 22 6 19 20
Mean 186 156 1.21 (L) 29 24 1 23 38 9 34 29
Note: c=cohesion in kPa, r =residual, u =undrained; f=angle of friction; L =low sensitivity.
rise to a rapid reduction of undrained shear strength along the fissures. In fact, the undrained
shear strength along fissures in till may be as little as one-sixth that of the intact soil. The
nature of the various fissure coatings (sand, silt or clay-size material) is of critical importance
in determining the shear strength behaviour of fissured tills. Deformation and permeability
also are controlled by the nature of the fissure surfaces and coatings.
Eyles and Sladen (1981) recognized four zones of weathering within the soil profile of lodge-
ment till in the coastal area of Northumberland, England (Table 5.18a). As the degree of
weathering of the till increases, so does the clay fraction and moisture content. This, in turn,
leads to changes in the liquid and plastic limits and in the shear strength (Table 5.18b and
Fig. 5.12).
Deposits of stratified drift often are subdivided into two categories, namely, those that
develop in contact with ice, namely, ice contact deposits, and those that accumulate beyond
the limits of ice, forming in streams, lakes or seas, that is, proglacial deposits.
238
Chapter 5
Table 5.18a. A weathering scheme for Northumberland lodgement tills (after Eyles and
Sladen, 1981). With kind permission of Elsevier
Weathering Maximum
zone Zone Description depth (m)
Highly IV Oxidized till and surficial material 3
weathered Strong oxidation colours
High rotten boulder content
Leaching of most primary carbonate
Prismatic gleyed jointing
Pedological profile usually leached brown earth
Moderately III Oxidized till 8
weathered Increased clay content
Low rotten boulder content
Little leaching of primary carbonate
Usually dark brown or dark red brown
Base commonly defined by fluvioglacial
sediments
Slightly II Selective oxidation along fissure surfaces 10
weathered where present, otherwise as Zone I
Unweathered I Unweathered till
No post-depositionally rotted boulders
No oxidation
No leaching of primary carbonate
Usually dark grey
Table 5.18b. Typical geotechnical properties for Northumberland lodgement tills
(after Eyles and Sladen, 1981). With kind permission of Elsevier
Weathered zones
Property I III & IV
Bulk density (Mg m- 3) 2.15–2.30 1.90–2.20
Natural moisture content (%) 10–15 12–25
Liquid limit (%) 25–40 35–60
Plastic limit (%) 12–20 15–25
Plasticity index 0–20 15–40
Liquidity index - 0.20 to - 0.05 III - 0.15 to +0.05
IV - 0 to +30
Grading of fine (<2 mm) fraction
% clay 20–35 30–50
% silt 30–40 30–50
% sand 30–50 10–25
Average activity 0.64 0.68
c¢ (kPa) 0–15 0–25
f¢ (degrees) 32–37 27–35
f ¢ (degrees) 30–32 15–32
r
239
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 5.12
(a) Lodgement till from Northumberland, England, showing the variation with depth of carbonate content, undrained shear
strength, moisture content, Atterberg limits and liquidity index. (b) Particle size distribution for weathered and unweathered tills
shown in (a). (c) Plasticity chart for weathered and unweathered tills shown in (a). n=number of determinations (after Eyles and
Sladen, 1981). With kind permission of Elsevier.
The range of particle size found in outwash fans varies from coarse sands to boulders. When
they are first deposited, their porosity may be anything from 25 to 50%, and they tend to be
very permeable. The finer silt–clay fraction tends to be transported further downstream. Other
ice contact deposits, namely, kames, kame terraces and eskers, usually consist of sands and
gravels.
The most familiar proglacial deposits are varved clays. The thickness of the individual varve
is frequently less than 2 mm, although much thicker layers have been noted in some
deposits. Generally, the coarser layer is of silt size and the finer of clay size. Varved clays
tend to be normally consolidated or lightly overconsolidated, although it usually is difficult to
make the distinction. In many cases, the precompression may have been due to ice loading.
The range of liquid limit for varved clays tends to vary between 30 and 80%, whereas that of
plastic limit often varies between 15 and 30% (Table 5.19). These limits allow the material to
240
Chapter 5
Table 5.19. Some properties of varved and laminated clays
Varved clays, Elk Laminated clays,
Valley, British Columbia* Teesside, England**
Moisture content (%) 35 25–35 (30)
Plastic limit (%) 22 18–31 (26)
Liquid limit (%) 34 29–78 (56)
Plasticity index (%) 15.5 19–49 (33)
Liquidity index 0.36 - 0.12–0.35 (0.15)
Activity 0.36 0.47–0.65 (0.54)
Linear shrinkage 9–14 (11)
Compression index 0.405–0.587 (0.496) 0.55
Undrained shear strength (kPa) 20–102 (62)
Note: Range with average value in brackets.
*After George, 1986.
**After Bell and Coulthard, 1997.
be classified as inorganic silty clay of medium to high plasticity or compressibility. In some
varved clay, the natural moisture content is near the liquid limit. Consequently, these clays
are soft and frequently have sensitivities around 4 (Bell and Coulthard, 1997). Their activity
tends to range between active and normal, and some may be expansive. The average
strength of some varved clays, for example, from Ontario, is about 40 kPa, with a range of
24–49 kPa. The effective stress parameters of apparent cohesion and angle of shearing
resistance range from 0.7 to 19.5 kPa, and 22–25∞, respectively.
The material of which quick clays are composed is predominantly smaller than 0.002 mm
(Geertsema and Torrance, 2005). Many deposits, however, seem to be very poor in clay
minerals, containing a high proportion of ground-down, fine quartz. The fabric of these
soils contains aggregations. Granular particles, whether aggregations or primary miner-
als, are rarely in direct contact, being linked generally by bridges of fine particles. Clay
minerals usually are non-oriented, and clay coatings on primary minerals tend to be
uncommon, as are cemented junctions. Networks of platelets occur in some soils. Quick
clays generally exhibit little plasticity, their plasticity index usually varying from 8 to 12%.
Their liquidity index normally exceeds 1, and their liquid limits are often less than 40%.
Quick clays usually are inactive, their activity frequently being less than 0.5. The most
extraordinary property possessed by quick clays is their very high sensitivity. In other
words, a large proportion of their undisturbed strength is permanently lost following shear
(Fig. 5.13). The small fraction of the original strength regained after remoulding may be
attributable to the development of some different form of interparticle bonding. The reason
why only a small fraction of the original strength is recovered is because the rate at which
it develops is so slow.
241
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 5.13
Moisture content, consistency indices, undrained shear strength and sensitivity of quick clay from near Trondheim, Norway
(from Bell and De Bruyn, 1998).
Frost Action in Soil
Frost action in a soil is influenced by the initial temperature of the soil, as well as the air tem-
perature; the intensity and duration of the freeze period; the depth of frost penetration; the
depth of the water table; and the type of ground cover. If frost penetrates down to the capil-
lary fringe in fine soils, especially silts, then, under certain conditions, lenses of ice may be
developed. The formation of such ice lenses may, in turn, cause frost heave and frost boil
that may lead to the break-up of roads, the failure of slopes, etc. Shrinkage, which is attrib-
utable to thermal contraction and desiccation, gives rise to polygonal cracking in the ground.
Water that accumulates in the cracks is frozen and consequently helps increase their size.
This action may lead to the development of lenses of ice.
Classification of Frozen Soil
Ice may occur in frozen soil as small disseminated crystals whose total mass exceeds that of
the mineral grains. It also may occur as large tabular masses that range up to several metres
242
Chapter 5
thick, or as ice wedges. The latter may be several metres wide and may extend to 10 m or
so in depth. As a consequence, frozen soils need to be described and classified for engineering
purposes. A method of classifying frozen soils involves the identification of the soil type and
the character of the ice (Andersland, 1987). First, the character of the actual soil is classified
according to the Unified Soil Classification system (Table 5.2). Second, the soil characteris-
tics consequent on freezing are added to the description. Frozen-soil characteristics are
divided into two basic groups based on whether or not segregated ice can be seen with the
naked eye (Table 5.20). Third, the ice present in the frozen soil is classified; this refers to
inclusions of ice that exceed 25 mm in thickness.
The amount of segregated ice in a frozen mass of soil depends largely on the intensity and
rate of freezing. When freezing takes place quickly, no layers of ice are visible, whereas slow
Table 5.20. Description and classification of frozen soils (from Andersland, 1987)
I. Description
of soil phase
(independent of
frozen state) Classify soil phase by the Unified Soil Classification system
Major group Subgroup
Description Designation Description Designation
Segregated N Poorly Nf
ice not bonded or
visible by eye friable
No n
excess ice Nb
Well bonded Excess ice e
II. Description of Individual Vx
frozen soil ice crystals
or inclusions
Segregated V Ice coatings Ve
ice visible on particles
by eye (ice Random or Vr
25 mm or irregularly
less thick) oriented ice
formations
Stratified or Vs
distinctly
oriented ice
formations
III. Descriptionof Ice greater ICE Ice with soil ICE +soil
substantial than 25 mm inclusions type
ice strata thick Ice without soil ICE
inclusions
243
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
freezing produces visible layers of ice of various thicknesses. Ice segregation in soil also
takes place under cyclic freezing and thawing conditions.
Mechanical Properties of Frozen Soil
The presence of masses of ice in a soil means that as far as engineering is concerned, the
properties of both have to be taken into account. Ice has no long-term strength, that is, it flows
under very small loads. If a constant load is applied to a specimen of ice, instantaneous elastic
deformation occurs. This is followed by creep, which eventually develops a steady state.
Instantaneous elastic recovery takes place on removal of the load, followed by recovery of
the transient creep.
The relative density influences the behaviour of frozen coarse soils, especially their shearing
resistance, in a manner similar to that when they are unfrozen. The cohesive effects of the ice
matrix are superimposed on the latter behaviour, and the initial deformation of frozen sand is
dominated by the ice matrix. Sand in which all the water is more or less frozen exhibits a brittle
type of failure at low strains, for example, at around 2% strain. The water content of coarse
soils is converted almost wholly into ice at a very few degrees below freezing point. Hence,
frozen coarse soils exhibit a reasonably high compressive strength only a few degrees below
freezing, and there is justification for using this parameter as a design index of their perform-
ance in the field, provided that a suitable factor of safety is incorporated. The order of increase
in compressive strength with decreasing temperature is shown in Figure 5.14.
On the other hand, frozen clay, in addition to often containing a lower content of ice than
sand, has layers of unfrozen water (of molecular proportions) around the clay particles.
These molecular layers of water contribute towards a plastic type of failure. In fact, in fine
sediments, the intimate bond between the water and clay particles results in a significant
proportion of soil moisture remaining unfrozen at temperatures as low as - 25∞C. The more
the clay material in the soil, the greater is the quantity of unfrozen moisture. As far as the
unconfined compressive strength of frozen clays is concerned, there is a dramatic increase
in strength with decreasing temperature. In fact, it appears to increase exponentially with the
relative proportion of frozen moisture. Using silty clay as an example, the amount of moisture
frozen at - 18∞C may be only 1.25 times that frozen at - 5∞C, but the increase in compressive
strength may be more than fourfold.
Because frozen ground is more or less impermeable, this increases the problems due to thaw
by impeding the removal of surface water. What is more, when thaw occurs, the amount of
water liberated may greatly exceed that originally present in the melted out layer of the soil
(see below). As the soil thaws downwards, the upper layers become saturated, and since
244
Chapter 5
Figure 5.14
Increase in compressive strength with decreasing temperature.
water cannot drain through the frozen soil beneath, they may suffer a complete loss of
strength. Indeed, under some circumstances excess water may act as a transporting agent,
thereby giving rise to soil flows.
Thaw settlement is associated with the thawing of frozen ground. As ice melts, settlement
occurs, water being squeezed from the ground by overburden pressure or by any applied
loads. Excess pore water pressures develop when the rate of ice melting is greater than the
245
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
discharge capacity of the soil. Since excess pore pressures can lead to the failure of slopes
and foundations, both the rate and amount of thaw settlement should be determined. Pore
water pressures also should be monitored.
Further consolidation, due to drainage, may occur on thawing. If the soil was previously in a
relatively dense state, then the amount of consolidation is small. This situation only occurs in
coarse frozen soils containing very little segregated ice. On the other hand, some degree of
segregation of ice is always present in fine frozen soils. For example, lenses and veins of ice
may be formed when silts have access to capillary water. Under such conditions, the mois-
ture content of the frozen silts significantly exceeds the moisture content present in their
unfrozen state. As a result, when such ice-rich soils thaw under drained conditions, they
undergo large settlements under their own weight.
Frost Heave
The following factors are necessary for the occurrence of frost heave, namely, capillary
saturation at the beginning and during the freezing of soil, plentiful supply of subsoil water
and soil possessing fairly high capillarity together with moderate permeability. Grain size
is another important factor influencing frost heave. For example, gravels, sands and clays
are not particularly susceptible to heave, whereas silts definitely are. The reason for this
is that silty soils are associated with high capillary rises, but at the same time their voids
are large enough to allow moisture to move quickly enough for them to become saturated
rapidly. If ice lenses are present in clean gravels or sands, then they simply represent
small pockets of moisture that have been frozen. Casagrande (1932) suggested that the
particle size critical to the development of frost heave was 0.02 mm. If the quantity of
such particles in a soil is less than 1%, then no heave is to be expected, but considerable
heaving may take place if the amount is over 3% in non-uniform soils and over 10% in
very uniform soils.
As heave amounting to 30% of the thickness of the frozen layer have frequently been
recorded, moisture other than that initially present in the frozen layer must be drawn from
below, since water increases in volume by only 9% when frozen. In fact, when a soil freezes,
there is an upward transfer of heat from the groundwater towards the area in which freezing
is occurring. The thermal energy, in turn, initiates an upward migration of moisture within the
soil. The moisture in the soil can be translocated upwards either in the vapour or liquid phase
or by a combination of both. Moisture diffusion by the vapour phase occurs more readily in
soils with larger void spaces than in fine soils. If a soil is saturated, migration in the vapour
phase cannot take place.
246
Chapter 5
Organic Soils: Peat
Peat is an accumulation of partially decomposed and disintegrated plant remains that have
been fossilized under conditions of incomplete aeration and high water content (Hobbs,
1986). Physico-chemical and biochemical processes cause this organic material to remain in
a state of preservation over a long period of time.
Macroscopically, peaty material can be divided into three basic groups, namely, amorphous
granular, coarse fibrous and fine fibrous peat (Landva and Pheeney, 1980). The amorphous
granular peat has a high colloidal fraction, holding most of its water in an adsorbed rather than
free state. In the other two types, the peat is composed of fibres, these usually being woody.
In the coarse variety, a mesh of second-order size exists within the interstices of the first-order
network, and in fine fibrous peat, the interstices are very small and contain colloidal matter.
The ash percentage of peat consists of the mineral residue remaining after its ignition, which
is expressed as a fraction of the total dry weight. Ash contents may be as low as 2% in some
highly organic peat, or it may be as high as 50%. The mineral material is usually quartz sand
and silt. In many deposits, the mineral content increases with depth. The mineral content
influences the engineering properties of peat.
The void ratio peat ranges between 9, for dense amorphous granular peat, and 25, for fibrous
types with a high content of sphagnum (Table 5.21). It usually tends to decrease with depth
within a peat deposit. Such high void ratios give rise to phenomenally high water contents.
The latter is the most distinctive characteristic of peat. Indeed, most of the peculiarities in the
physical characteristics of peat are attributable to the amount of moisture present. This varies
according to the type of peat; it may be as low as 500% in some amorphous granular
varieties, although values exceeding 3000% have been recorded from coarse fibrous
varieties.
The volumetric shrinkage of peat increases up to a maximum and then remains constant, the
volume being reduced almost to the point of complete dehydration. The amount of shrinkage
that can occur generally ranges between 10 and 75% of the original volume of the peat, and
it can involve reductions in void ratio from over 12 down to about 2.
Amorphous granular peat has a higher bulk density than the fibrous types. For instance, in the
former, it can range up to 1.2 Mg m- 3, whereas in woody fibrous peat, it may be half this figure.
However, the dry density is a more important engineering property of peat, influencing its behav-
iour under load. Dry densities of drained peat fall within the range of 65–120 kg m- 3. The dry den-
sity is influenced by the mineral content, and higher values than those quoted can be obtained
247
E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 5.21. Some properties of bog peat from Pant Dedwydd, North Wales (after Nichol and Farmer, 1998). With kind permission of Elsevier
Moisture Organic Bulk Dry Initial Coefficient of
content content unit weight unit weight Specific void volume change Compression
Depth (m) (%) pH (%) (kN m- 3) (kN m- 3) gravity ratio (e ) m (m2MN- 1) index, C
o v c
a b a b
1.5 894 4.0 86.2 10.4 1.05 1.51 13.38 11.34 2.17 7.02 10.76
2.0 561 4.4 67.6 10.2 1.55 1.67 9.77 8.91 1.46 4.13 5.42
2.5 620 3.8 69.0 11.6 1.61 1.65 9.24 11.12 2.23 4.91 7.87
3.0 795 3.8 75.7 11.2 1.26 1.59 11.61 11.74 2.11 6.38 9.17
3.5 971 4.3 61.5 10.1 0.94 1.73 17.40 11.77 1.94 9.33 12.31
4.0 662 4.1 81.6 10.2 1.34 1.54 10.49 10.26 1.60 5.08 6.34
4.5 583 4.1 63.8 10.3 1.51 1.70 10.26 11.51 1.66 5.58 6.44
5.5 943 4.4 79.9 10.6 1.02 1.56 14.29 10.80 1.57 7.17 8.28
6.5 965 4.3 75.6 9.9 0.92 1.59 16.28 8.76 2.32 6.14 13.82
Note: Load ranges, s: (a) 12.5–25 kN m- 2; (b) 100–200 kN m- 2.
v
248
Chapter 5
when peat possesses high mineral residues. The specific gravity of peat ranges from as low as
1.1 up to about 1.8, again being influenced by the content of mineral matter. Due to its extremely
low submerged density, which may be between 15 and 35 kg m- 3, peat is prone to rotational fail-
ure or failure by spreading, particularly under the action of horizontal seepage forces.
In an undrained bog, the unconfined compressive strength is negligible, the peat possessing
a consistency approximating to that of a liquid. The strength is increased by drainage to
values between 20 and 30 kPa and the modulus of elasticity to between 100 and 140 kPa.
When loaded, peat deposits undergo high deformations but the modulus of deformation
tends to increase with increasing load. If peat is very fibrous, it appears to suffer indefinite
deformation without planes of failure developing. On the other hand, failure planes nearly
always form in dense amorphous granular peat.
If the organic content of a soil exceeds 20% by weight, consolidation becomes increasingly
dominated by the behaviour of the organic material (Berry and Poskitt, 1972). For example,
on loading, peat undergoes a decrease in permeability of several orders of magnitude.
Moreover, residual pore water pressure affects primary consolidation, and considerable sec-
ondary consolidation further complicates settlement prediction.
Differential and excessive settlement is the principal problem confronting the engineer work-
ing on peaty soil (Berry et al., 1985). When a load is applied to peat, settlement occurs
because of the low lateral resistance offered by the adjacent unloaded peat. Serious shear-
ing stresses are induced even by moderate loads. Worse still, should the loads exceed a
given minimum, then settlement may be accompanied by creep, lateral spreading, or in
extreme cases, by rotational slip and upheaval of adjacent ground. At any given time, the
total settlement in peat due to loading involves settlement with and without volume change.
Settlement without volume change is more serious for it can give rise to the types of failure
mentioned. What is more, it does not enhance the strength of peat.
Description of Rocks and Rock Masses
Description is the initial step in an engineering assessment of rocks and rock masses.
Therefore, it should be both uniform and consistent in order to gain acceptance. The data col-
lected regarding rocks and rock masses should be recorded on data sheets for subsequent
processing. A data sheet for the description of rock masses and another for discontinuity
surveys are shown in Figures 5.15 and 2.17, respectively.
The complete specification of a rock mass requires descriptive information on the nature and
distribution in space of both the materials that constitute the mass (rock, water and air-filled voids)
249
E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Figure 5.15
Rock mass data description sheet (after Anon, 1977). With kind permission of the Geological society.
250
Chapter 5
and the discontinuities that divide it (Anon, 1977a). The intact rock may be considered a
continuum or polycrystalline solid consisting of an aggregate of minerals or grains, whereas
a rock mass may be looked upon as a discontinuum of rock material transected by disconti-
nuities. The properties of the intact rock are governed by the physical properties of the mate-
rials of which it is composed and the manner in which they are bonded to each other. The
parameters that may be used in a description of intact rock therefore include petrological
name, mineral composition, colour, texture, minor lithological characteristics, degree of
weathering or alteration, density, porosity, strength, hardness, intrinsic or primary permeabil-
ity, seismic velocity and modulus of elasticity. Swelling and slake durability can be taken into
account where appropriate, such as in the case of argillaceous rocks. The behaviour of a rock
mass is, to a large extent, determined by the type, spacing, orientation and characteristics of
the discontinuities present (see Chapter 2). As a consequence, the parameters that ought to
be used in the description of a rock mass include the nature and geometry of the discontinu-
ities, as well as its overall strength, deformation modulus, secondary permeability and seis-
mic velocity. It is not necessary, however, to describe all the parameters for either an intact
rock or a rock mass.
Intact rock may be described from a geological or engineering point of view. In the first case,
the origin and mineral content of a rock are of prime importance, as is its texture and any
change that has occurred since its formation. In this respect, the name of a rock provides an
indication of its origin, mineralogical composition and texture (Table 5.22). Only a basic pet-
rographical description of the rock is required when describing a rock mass.
The texture of a rock, in particular its grain size, exerts some influence on the physical
properties of a rock, for example, finer-grained rocks are usually stronger than coarser-grained
varieties (Table 5.23). The overall colour of a rock should be assessed by reference to a colour
chart (e.g. the rock colour chart of the Geological Society of America). Rock material tends to
deteriorate in quality as a result of weathering and/or alteration. Classifications based on the
estimation and description of physical disintegration and chemical decomposition of originally
sound rock are given in Chapter 3. Density and porosity are two fundamental properties of rocks.
The density of a rock is defined as its mass per unit volume. It is influenced primarily by mineral
composition on the one hand and the amount of void space on the other. As the proportion of
void space increases, the density decreases. Anon (1979) grouped the dry density and porosity
of rocks into five classes as shown in Table 5.24. The unconfined compressive strength of a rock
may be regarded as the highest stress that a cylindrical specimen can carry when a unidirec-
tional stress is applied, normally in an axial direction, to its ends. Although its application is lim-
ited, the unconfined compressive strength does allow comparisons to be made between rocks
and affords some indication of rock behaviour under more complex stress systems (Tsiambaos
and Sabatakakis, 2004). There are several scales of unconfined compressive strength; three are
given in Table 5.25. Rocks have a much lower tensile than compressive strength. The ratio of
251
Table 5.22. Rock type classification (after Anon, 1979). With kind permission of Springer
Chemical/
Genetic/group Detrital sedimentary Pyroclastic organic
Usual structure Bedded
At least 50% of
At least 50% of grains grains are of fine-
Composition Grains of rock,quartz, feldspar and clay minerals are of carbonate grained igneous rock
Grains are of rock fragments
60 Very Boulders Rounded grains: Saline
coarse- Cobbles Rounded grains: Carbonate Calcirudite agglomerate rocks
grained conglomerate gravel Halite
Angular grains: Anhydrite
2 Coarse- Gravel Angular gains: volcanic breccia
grained breccia lapilli tuff Gypsum
Grains are mainly mineral fragments Limestone
Sandstone: Grains are mainly
mineral fragments Dolomite
Quartz arenite: 95% quartz,
Medium- voids empty or cemented Carbonate Calcarenite Tuff Chert
grained Sand Arkose: 75% quartz, up to sand
25% feldspar:voids empty or Flint
cemented
Greywacke: 75% quartz, 15%
fine detrital material: rock
and feldspar fragments
0.06 Fine- Silt Siltstone: 50% fine-grained Carbonate Calcisiltite Fine-grained
grained particles silt chalk tuff
Peat
0.002 Very-fine Claystone: 50% very Carbonate Calcilutite Very fine- Lignite
grained Clay fine-grained particles mud grained tuff Coal
Glassy
amorphous
252
)mm(ezisniarG
suoecaduR
suoecanerA
suoecalligrA
enotsduM
elissif:elahs
enotsdum enotslraM
)detaitnereffidnu(etimoloDdnaenotsemiL hsacinacloV
E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Chapter
5
Genetic/group Metamorphic Igneous
Usual structure Foliated Massive
Composition Quartz, feldspars, Light-coloured minerals are Dark and light Dark
micas, acicular quartz, feldspar, mica minerals minerals
dark minerals
Acid rocks Intermediate Basic rocks Ultrabasic
60 Very
coarse-
grained Pegmatite Pyroxenite
Gneiss (ortho-, Marble and
2 Coarse- para-, Alternate Granite Diorite Gabbro peridotite
grained layers of granular Granulite
and flaky minerals Serpentinite
Grain
size Medium- Migmatite Microgranite Microdiorite Dolerite
(mm) grained Schist Quartzite
Hornfels
Phyllite Amphibolite
0.06 Fine- Rhyolite Andesite Basalt
grained
0.002 Very Slate
fine- Mylonite
grained
Glassy Obsidian and pitchstone Tachylyte
amorphous Volcanic glasses
253
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.23. Description of grain size
Term Particle size Equivalent soil grade
Very coarse-grained Over 60 mm Boulders and cobbles
Coarse-grained 2–60 mm Gravel
Medium-grained 0.006–2 mm Sand
Fine-grained 0.002–0.06 mm Silt
Very fine-grained Less than 0.002 Clay
compressive to tensile strength generally is between 15:1 and 25:1. Unfortunately, however, the
determination of the direct tensile strength frequently has proved difficult since it is not easy to
grip the specimen without introducing bending stresses. Hence, most values of tensile strength
quoted have been obtained by indirect methods of testing. One of the most popular of these
methods is the point load test. Franklin and Broch (1972) suggested the scale for the point load
strength shown in Table 5.26. The Schmidt hammer frequently is used as a means of assessing
rock hardness. Unfortunately, the Schmidt hammer is not a satisfactory method for the determi-
nation of the hardness of very soft or very hard rocks, but there is a reasonably good correlation
between Schmidt hardness and unconfined compressive strength. Young’s modulus (deforma-
bility) is the ratio of vertical stress on a rock specimen, tested in unconfined compression, to
strain. As far as deformability is concerned, the five classes shown in Table 5.27 have been
proposed (Anon, 1979).
The durability of rocks is referred to in Chapter 3, the description of discontinuities in Chapter
2 and permeability in Chapter 4.
Engineering Aspects of Igneous and Metamorphic Rocks
The plutonic igneous rocks are characterized by granular texture, massive structure and
relatively homogeneous composition. In their unaltered state, they are essentially sound and
durable with adequate strength for any engineering requirement (Table 5.28). In some
Table 5.24. Dry density and porosity (after Anon, 1979). With kind permission of Springer
Class Dry density (Mg m- 3) Description Porosity (%) Description
1 Less than 1.8 Very low Over 30 Very high
2 1.8–2.2 Low 30–15 High
3 2.2–2.55 Moderate 15–5 Medium
4 2.55–2.75 High 5–1 Low
5 Over 2.75 Very high Less than 1 Very low
254
Chapter 5
Table 5.25. Grades of unconfined compressive strength. With kind permission of Springer
Geological society, ISRM,
(Anon, 1977) IAEG, (Anon, 1979) (Anon, 1981)
Strength Strength Strength
Term (MPa) Term (MPa) Term (MPa)
Very weak less than 1.25 Weak Under 15 Very low Under 6
Weak 1.25–5.00 Moderately 15–50 Low 6–10
Moderately weak 5.00–12.50 Strong Moderate 20–60
Moderately strong 12.50–50 Strong 50–120 High 60–200
Strong 50–100 Very strong 120–230 Very high Over 200
Very strong 100–200 Extremely Over 230
Extremely strong over 200 strong
instances, however, intrusive rocks may be highly altered by weathering or hydrothermal
attack; furthermore, fissure zones are by no means uncommon. The rock mass may be frag-
mented along such zones; indeed, it may be reduced to sand-size material, or it may have
undergone varying degrees of kaolinization. Generally, the weathered product of plutonic
rocks has a large clay content although that of granitic rocks is sometimes porous with
permeability comparable to that of medium-grained sand. As would be expected, the charac-
ter of the weathering is influenced by the climatic conditions under which weathering occurs.
For instance, the degree of leaching that occurs during the chemical reactions governs the
type of residual minerals that form. If only small amounts of cations are removed from the
system, then montmorillonite or illite may be formed. On the other hand, should extensive
eluviation processes develop, then kaolinite and, finally, gibbsite are produced. For example,
Haskins et al. (1998) found that the granite saprolite at Injaka Dam site, Mpumalanga
Province, South Africa, had formed under intense chemical weathering in well-drained con-
ditions. Gibbsite and goethite occurred at the top of the profile where the most intense chem-
ical weathering had taken place. The strength of granite undergoes a notable reduction on
weathering. Some deeply weathered granites in South Africa have been identified as being
Table 5.26. Point load strength classification (after Franklin and Broch, 1972)
Point load strength Equivalent uniaxial
index (MPa) compressive strength (MPa)
Extremely high strength Over 10 Over 160
Very high strength 3–10 50–160
High strength 1–3 15–60
Medium strength 0.3–1 5–16
Low strength 0.1–0.3 1.6–5
Very low strength 0.03–0.1 0.5–1.6
Extremely low strength Less than 0.03 Less than 0.5
255
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 5.27. Classification of deformability (after Anon, 1979). With
kind prmission of Springer
Class Deformability (MPa ¥ 10- 3) Description
1 Less than 5 Very high
2 5–15 High
3 15–30 Moderate
4 30–60 Low
5 Over 60 Very low
prone to dispersivity. For example, aggressive dispersivity was noted by Haskins et al.
(1998). The relatively low values of dry density of the saprolite concerned (1.23–1.86 Mg m- 3)
meant that it had a high void ratio (0.54–1.02). Such high void ratios also render the saprolite
potentially collapsible.
Generally speaking, the older volcanic deposits do not prove a problem in foundation
engineering, ancient lavas having strengths frequently in excess of 200 MPa. But volcanic
deposits of geologically recent age prove treacherous at times, particularly if they have to
carry heavy loads. This is because they often represent markedly anisotropic sequences in
Table 5.28. Geomechanical properties of some igneous and metamorphic rocks
Unconfined Point load Schmidt Young’s
Specific compressive strength hammer modulus
gravity strength (MPa) (MPa) hardness (GPa)
Mount Sorrel Granite 2.68 176.4 (VS)a 11.3 (EHS)b 54 60.6 (VL)c
Eskdale Granite 2.65 198.3 (VS) 12.0 (EHS) 50 56.6 (L)
Dalbeattie Granite 2.67 147.8 (VS) 10.3 (EHS) 69 41.1 (L)
Markfieldite 2.68 185.2 (VS) 11.3 (EHS) 66 56.2 (L)
Granophyre (Cumbria) 2.65 204.7 (ES) 14.0 (EHS) 52 84.3 (VL)
Andesite (Somerset) 2.79 204.3 (ES) 14.8 (EHS) 67 77.0 (VL)
Basalt (Derbyshire 2.91 321.0 (ES) 16.9 (EHS) 61 93.6 (VL)
Slate* (North Wales) 2.67 96.4 (S) 7.9 (VHS) 42 31.2 (L)
Slate+(North Wales) 72.3 (S) 4.2 (VHS)
Schist* 2.66 82.7 (S) 7.2 (VHS) 3`1 35.5 (L)
(Aberdeenshire)
Schist+ 71.9 (S) 5.7 (VHS)
Gneiss 2.66 162.0 (VS) 12.7 (EHS) 49 46.0 (L)
Hornfels (Cumbria) 2.68 303.1 (ES) 20.8 (EHS) 61 109.3 (VL)
Note: *Tested normal to cleavage or schistosity; +tested parallel to cleavage or schistosity.
aClassification of strength according to Anon (1977a): ES =extremely strong, over 200 MPa; VS =very
strong, 100–200 MPa; S =strong, 50–100 MPa.
bClassification of point load strength according to Franklin, J.A. and Broch, E. 1972: EHS =extremely
high strength, over 10 MPa; VHS =very high strength, 3–10 MPa.
cClassification of deformability according to Anon (1979): VL =very low, over 60 GPa; L =low,
30–60 GPa.
256
Chapter 5
which lavas, pyroclasts and mudflows are interbedded. In addition, weathering during peri-
ods of volcanic inactivity may have produced fossil soils, these being of much lower strength.
The individual lava flows may be thin and transected by a polygonal pattern of cooling joints.
They also may be vesicular or contain pipes, cavities or even tunnels (see Chapter 1).
Normally, the geomechanical properties of fresh basalts and dolerites are satisfactory for
engineering purposes. The values of some geomechanical properties of basalts are illus-
trated in Table 5.29. Bell and Jermy (2000) examined a number of the properties of some
dolerites from South Africa. They found that the dry density of these dolerites ranged from
2.72 to 2.99 Mg m- 3, with a mean value of 2.93 Mg m- 3. Such high dry densities were
reflected in low or, more commonly, very low porosities (i.e. less than 1%). Of the specimens
tested in unconfined compression, 35% were extremely strong and 46% were very strong,
according to the strength classification of Anon (1977a). In fact, the unconfined compressive
strength ranged from 31.4 to 368.4 MPa, the lower values being associated with moderately
or slightly weathered dolerites. In addition, the grain size appeared to exert a significant influ-
ence on strength. For example, the maximum difference in strength between fine- and
medium-grained dolerite was 178 MPa, whereas the minimum difference was 51 MPa, the
fine-grained dolerite being the stronger one. The range of Young’s modulus for all dolerites
extended from 40.9 to 100.5 GPa.
Certain basalts and dolerites are susceptible to rapid weathering. This rapid breakdown
phenomenon is referred to as slaking. Certain factors are responsible for causing and/or
enhancing breakdown of basalts and dolerites. These include swelling and shrinking of
smectitic clays upon hydration and dehydration, respectively, and swelling and shrinking of
Table 5.29. Values of some geomechanical properties of basalts
Dry density Unconfined compressive Point load Young’s modulus
Location (Mg m- 3) stength (MPa) strength (MPa) (GPa)
Lesotho* Min Max Mean Min Max Mean Min Max Mean
HAB 2.64 40 190 90 33.3
MAB 2.72 87 202 112 39.7
NAB 2.77 75 234 123 38.0
Turkey+ 2.68 86.3 136.4 120.1 7.7 10.0 8.5 44.0 81.6 66.1
Greece$ 43.1 91.2 74.2 1.0 3.4 2.5
USAf 81 413 266 14.5 22.0127.9 78
Note: HAB =highly amygdaloidal basalt; MAB =moderately amygdaloidal basalt; NAB =non-
amygdaloidal basalt.
* From Bell and Haskins (1997).
+From Tugrul and Gürpinar (1997).
$From Aggistalis et al. (1996).
f
From Schultz (1995).
257
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
particular zeolites. Repeated hydration and dehydration results in mechanical disruption of
small portions of rock close to an exposed surface, causing flaking and surface cracking. The
process is self-perpetuating as the formation of these cracks allows access of water into the
rock, causing an increase in the degree and rate of weathering. Deuteric alteration of primary
minerals brought about by hot gases and fluids from a magmatic source migrating through rock
has been claimed to be responsible for the formation of secondary clay minerals in basalts and
dolerites. The primary rock-forming minerals that tend to undergo the most deuteric alteration
are olivine, plagioclase, pyroxene and biotite, and additionally volcanic glass when present
in the case of basalt. Haskins and Bell (1995) suggested that if basalt contains between 10
and 20% of secondary montmorillonite, then it has the potential to degrade. They also noted
that the disintegration of some basalt took the form of crazing, that is, extensive microfractur-
ing that develops on exposure to the atmosphere or moisture. These microfractures expand
with time, causing the basalt to disintegrate into gravel-sized fragments.
Pyroclasts usually give rise to extremely variable ground conditions due to wide variations in
strength, durability and permeability. Their behaviour very much depends on their degree of
induration, for example, many agglomerates have enough strength to support heavy loads
and also have a low permeability. By contrast, ashes are weak and often highly permeable.
They also may be metastable and exhibit a significant decrease in their void ratio on satura-
tion. Ashes are frequently prone to sliding. Montmorillonite is not an uncommon constituent
in the weathered products of basic ashes.
Slates, phyllites and schists are characterized by textures that have a marked preferred orien-
tation. This preferred alignment of platey minerals accounts for cleavage and schistosity that
typify these metamorphic rocks and means that slate, in particular, is notably fissile. Obviously,
such rocks are appreciably stronger across than along the lineation. For example, Donath
(1964) demonstrated that cores cut in Martinsburg Slates at 90∞to the cleavage possessed the
highest strength, whereas cores cut at 30∞exhibited the lowest. These are high-density rocks
with correspondingly low values of porosity. Not only does cleavage and schistosity adversely
affect the strength of metamorphic rocks, it also makes them more susceptible to decay.
Generally speaking, however, slates, phyllites and schists weather slowly but the areas of
regional metamorphism in which they occur have suffered extensive folding so that rocks may
be fractured and deformed in places. Schists, slates and phyllites are variable in quality, some
being excellent foundations for heavy structures, others, regardless of the degree of their defor-
mation or weathering, are so poor as to be wholly undesirable. For instance, talc, chlorite and
sericite schist are weak rocks containing planes of schistosity only a millimetre or so apart.
Some schists become slippery on weathering and therefore fail under a moderately light load.
The engineering performance of gneiss usually is similar to that of granite. However,
some gneisses are strongly foliated, which means that they possess a texture with a
258
Chapter 5
preferred orientation. Generally, this will not significantly affect their engineering behaviour.
Jayawardena and Izawa (1994) discussed the weathering of various gneisses from Sri Lanka
and indicated their significant loss of strength on weathering, from approximately 180 MPa
unconfined compressive strength for fresh rocks, to 160 MPa for slightly weathered, 90 MPa
for moderately weathered and 11.5 MPa for highly weathered rocks. It can be seen from
these values that the strength reduction accelerates with the degree of weathering. Gneisses
may be fissured in places, and this can mean trouble. For instance, it would appear that
fissures in the gneiss under the heel of the Malpasset Dam, France, opened, allowing the
slow build-up of water pressure, which eventually led to its failure.
Fresh, thermally metamorphosed rocks such as quartzite and hornfels are very strong and
afford good ground conditions. Marble generally has the same advantages and disadvan-
tages as other carbonate rocks.
Engineering Behaviour of Sedimentary Rocks
Sandstones
Sandstones may vary from thinly laminated micaceous types to very thickly bedded varieties.
Moreover, they may be cross-bedded and are jointed. With the exception of shaley sand-
stone, sandstone is not subject to rapid surface deterioration on exposure.
Studies of sandstones have shown that their geomechanical properties vary widely. Such
variation has been attributed to differences in some of the petrographical characteristics of
sandstones, including grain size distribution, packing density, packing proximity, type of grain
contact, length of grain contact, amount of void space, type and amount of cement/matrix
material and mineral composition. For instance, Bell and Culshaw (1993) demonstrated that
in the sandstones from the Sherwood Sandstone Group in Nottinghamshire, England, those
with smaller mean grain size possessed higher strength. Conversely, the particle size meas-
ures had no influence on either compressive or indirect tensile strength of the sandstones of
the Sneinton Formation, Nottinghamshire, England, referred to by Bell and Culshaw (1998).
Bell (1978) and Shakoor and Bonelli (1991) drew the same conclusion for the sandstones
they examined. Dobereiner and de Freitas (1986) concluded that weak sandstones generally
were characterized by low packing density. Castro and Bell (1995) indicated that the varia-
tion in the unconfined compressive strength of the sandstones from the Clarens Formation,
South Africa, appeared to be related to the nature of the grain packing and the type of grain
contact. In nearly all cases, those samples that had unconfined compressive strengths in
excess of 40 MPa could be described as densely packed. The amount of grain contact (i.e.
the ratio of the length of contact a grain has with its neighbours to its own total length,
259
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
measured in two dimensions and expressed as a percentage) was regarded as exerting a
major influence on the strength and deformability of sandstones by Dyke and Dobereiner
(1991). Conflicting results also have been reported, relating to the influence of mineral
content on the geomechanical properties of sandstones. For instance, Bell and Lindsay
(1999) found that the unconfined compressive strength increased as the quartz content
increased in the sandstones of Natal Group, South Africa. In contrast, Bell (1978) found no
significant relationship between quartz content and strength in the sandstones from Fell
Sandstones of Northumberland, England. The cement content and textural interlocking of the
quartz grains was considered more important in terms of strength than quartz content. Ulusay
et al. (1994) agreed with Bell that textural interlocking of quartz grains was more important
than quartz content in terms of the Kozln Sandstone, Turkey. Bell noted that as the amount
of cement increased in the Fell Sandstone, its strength also increased. Indeed, if cement
binds the grains together, then a stronger rock is produced than one in which a similar
amount of detrital material performs the same function. However, the amount of cementing
material is more important than the type of cement. For example, ancient quartz arenites, in
which the voids are almost completely occupied with siliceous material are extremely strong
with crushing strengths exceeding 240 MPa. By contrast, poorly cemented sandstones may
possess crushing strengths of less than 3.5 MPa. According to Bell and Lindsay (1999),
increases in silica cement, in the form of quartz overgrowths, led to increases in strength in
the sandstones of Natal Group, South Africa.
The dry density and, especially, the porosity of sandstone are influenced by the amount of
cement and/or matrix material occupying the pores. Usually, the density of sandstone tends
to increase with increasing depth below the surface, the porosity decreasing.
The compressive strength of sandstone is influenced by its porosity; the higher the porosity,
the lower the strength. Pore water also plays a very significant role as far as the compressive
strength and deformation characteristics of sandstone are concerned (Jeng et al., 2004). As
can be seen from Table 5.30, it can reduce the unconfined compressive strengths by 30–60%.
The amount of saturation moisture content contained by the sample does not appear to be the
most important factor bringing about reduction in strength. Hawkins and McConnell (1992)
maintained that sandstones with abundant clay minerals or rock fragments showed significant
strength loss on wetting. They suggested that the reduction in strength may be related to soft-
ening and possible expansion of the clay mineral content. They further noted that the reduc-
tion in the modulus of deformation on wetting was progressive, being initiated at low moisture
content. Hawkins and McConnell found that values generally decrease sharply with increase
in moisture content. The indirect tensile strength of sandstones, as determined by the point
load test, tends to be less than one-fifteenth of their unconfined compressive strength. The
modulus of deformation of sandstones tends to decline as the porosity increases, and
increases as the unconfined compressive strength and tensile strength increase.
260
Chapter 5
Table 5.30. Some geomechanical properties of sandstones
Fell Sherwood Sneinton Clarens
Sandstone, Sandstsone, Sandstone, Natal Group Sandstone,
Northum- Nottingham- Nottingham- Sandstone, South
berland, UK shire, UK shire, UK South Africa Africa
Specific gravity
Range 2.64–2.71 2.61–2.76 2.70–2.77 2.66–2.70 —
Mean 2.67 2.68 2.73 2.68 —
Dry density
(Mg m- 3)
Range 2.14–2.40 1.77–1.96 2.22–2.31 2.40–2.54 1.93–2.58
Mean 2.32 1.83 2.25 2.48 2.27
Effective
porosity (%)
Range 6.5–20.5 24.0–28.8 8.9–14.8 2.4–9.3 1.5–19.2
Mean 9.8 26.2 12.0 6.3 15.1
Dry unconfined
compressive
strength (MPa)
Range 33.2–112.4 6.3–20.8 17.4–39.8 77–214 13.6–159
Mean 74.1 11.8 28.4 136.6 61.7
Saturated
unconfined
compressive
strength
(MPa)
Range 19.1–97.2 2.3–12.1 10.7–25.6 — —
Mean 52.8 7.0 18.2 — —
Point load
strength
(MPa)
Range 0.2–9.5 — 1.03–2.42 6–13 1.2–8.7
Mean 4.4 — 1.55 9.3 3.5
Brazilian strength
(MPa)
Range 2.1–9.5 0.41–1.82 1.76–3.68 6–20 —
Mean 6.5 0.80 2.5 14.9 —
Schmidt hardness
Range 22–52 — — 39–49 —
Mean 37.4 — — 44.1 —
Young’s modulus
(GPa)
Range 27.3–46.2 3.24–9.83 1.4–5.2 19.5–99.9 3.8–14.3
Mean 32.7 6.16 3.68 50.8 6.8
261
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The degree of resistance of sandstone to weathering depends on its mineralogical composition,
porosity, amount and type of cement and the presence of any planes of weakness such as
lamination. Sandstones are composed chiefly of quartz grains that are highly resistant to weath-
ering, but other minerals present in lesser amounts may be suspect, for example, feldspars may
become kaolinized. Calcareous cements are vulnerable to attack by weak acids. The durability
of weak sandstones, in particular, frequently is suspect. For instance, Yates (1992) referred to
certain sandstones from the Sherwood Sandstone Group, Stokes-on-Trent, England, which
often disaggregated on saturation. In fact, such sandstones had a saturated unconfined com-
pressive strength, when determined, of less than 0.5 MPa. The clay mineral content of sand-
stone can affect its durability. Bell and Culshaw (1998), for example, found a significant
relationship between clay fraction and slake durability in the sandstones from the Sneinton
Formation. The clay fraction ranged from 4 to 18%. Although most of these sandstones had
a high or very high slake durability index, it declined with increasing clay fraction.
Mudrocks
Mudrocks include those rocks that possess a modal grain size within the silt and/or clay grade.
In other words, mudrocks contain more than 50% clastic grains of less than 60 m m size, and
hence their geomechanical behaviour is dominated by the fine material. Therefore, they include
siltstones, shales, mudstones and claystones. In terms of mineralogy, the clay minerals and
quartz are quantitatively the most important, and the quartz–clay minerals ratio influences their
geotechnical properties. For example, the liquid limit of clay shales increases with increasing
clay mineral content, the amount of montmorillonite, if present, being especially important.
Because of their frequent high clay mineral content, mudrocks may possess weak strength, and
their durability may be suspect. Therefore, they can prove problematic as regards engineering.
Shales are characterized by their fissility. Consolidation with concomitant recrystallization on
the one hand and the parallel orientation of platey minerals, notably micas, on the other give
rise to the fissility of shales. An increasing content of siliceous or calcareous material gives
less fissile shale, whereas carbonaceous or organic shales are exceptionally fissile.
Moderate weathering increases the fissility of shale by partially removing the cementing
agents along the laminations or by expansion due to the hydration of clay particles.
The natural moisture content of shales varies from less than 5%, increasing to as high as
35% for some clayey shales (Table 5.31). When the natural moisture content of shales
exceeds 20%, they frequently are suspect as they tend to develop potentially high pore water
pressures. Usually, the moisture content in the weathered zone is higher than in the unweath-
ered shale beneath. Depending on the relative humidity, many shales slake almost immedi-
ately when exposed to air. Desiccation of shale following exposure leads to the creation of
262
Chapter
5
Table 5.31. Some geomechanical properties of mudrocks
Wrexham* Bearpaw Bearpaw Shale+ Pierre Shale#
Tow Law* Kirkheaton* (weathered) Shale+ (weathered) Pierre Shale# (weathered)
Natural moisture 5.9–10.5 — 6.4–14.3 19–27 25–36 15–38 26–38
content (%) 7.3 19 35 23 34
Bulk density 2.43–2.56 — 2.04–2.12 — — — —
(Mg m- 3) 2.51
Dry density 2.2–2.4 2.58–2.63 1.84–1.92 — — — —
(Mg m- 3) 2.34
Unconfined 25.7–45.4 34.4–69.9 — 1–28 0.5–1.0 0.8–2.6 —
compressive 35.5 1.4
strength (MPa)
Point load index
(MPa)
Diametral 0.9–0.37 0.11–0.54 — — — — —
Axial 1.22–2.67 1.16–13.23
Shear strength —
c(kPa) 0–50 — — — — —
f∞ 38–47
Liquid limit (%) — — 31–41 50–150 80–150 55–204 —
120 122 133
Plasticity index (%) — — 15–16 30–130 30–130 35–175 —
95 95 95 103
*From Coal Measures in Britain (after Bell et al., 1997).
+Clay shales from Canada (after Hsu and Nelson, 1993).
#Clay shales from USA (after Hsu and Nelson, 1993).
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
negative pore pressures and consequent tensile failure of weak intercrystalline bonds. This
leads to the production of shale particles of coarse sand to fine gravel size. Alternate wetting
and drying causes a rapid breakdown of compaction shales. Low-grade compaction shales,
in particular, undergo complete disintegration after several cycles of drying and wetting.
Mudstones tend to break down along irregular fracture patterns, which, when well developed,
can mean that these rocks disintegrate within one or two cycles of wetting and drying.
The swelling properties of certain clay shales have proven extremely detrimental to the integrity
of many civil engineering structures (Fig. 5.16). Swelling is attributable to the absorption of free
water by certain clay minerals, notably, montmorillonite, in the clay fraction of shale. Highly
fissured overconsolidated shales have greater swelling tendencies than poorly fissured
clayey shales, the fissures providing access for water.
The degree of packing, and hence the density and porosity of mudrocks, depend on their
mineral composition and grain size distribution, their mode of sedimentation, their subsequent
depth of burial and tectonic history, and the effects of diagenesis. The bulk and dry densities of
some British cemented shales are given in Table 5.31. The effect of weathering on density also
can be seen from Table 5.31. The porosity of shale may range from slightly under 5% to just
over 50%. Argillaceous materials are capable of undergoing appreciable suction before pore
water is removed, drainage commencing when the necessary air-entry suction is achieved
(about pF 2). Under increasing suction pressure, the incoming air drives out water from
mudrock and some shrinkage takes place in the fabric before air can offer support. Generally,
as the natural moisture content increases, so the effectiveness of soil suction declines.
Figure 5.16
Free swell of carbonaceous mudrock (after Jermy and Bell, 1991).
264
Chapter 5
When a load is applied to an essentially saturated shale foundation, the void ratio in the shale
decreases and the pore water attempts to migrate to regions of lesser load. Because of its
relative impermeability, water becomes trapped in the voids in the shale and can only migrate
slowly. As the load is increased, there comes a point when it is in part transferred to the pore
water, resulting in a build-up of pore water pressure. Depending on the permeability of the shale,
and the rate of loading, the pore water pressure increases in value so that it equals the pressure
imposed by the load. This greatly reduces the shear strength of the shale, and a serious failure
can occur, especially in the weaker compaction shales. For instance, high pore water pressure
in Pepper Shale was largely responsible for the foundation failure at Waco Dam, Texas
(Underwood, 1967). Pore water pressure problems are not so important in cemented shales.
It would appear that the strength of compacted shales decreases exponentially with increasing
void ratio and moisture content. In cemented shales, the amount and strength of the cement-
ing material are the important factors influencing intact strength. The unconfined compressive
strengths of some cemented shales from the Coal Measures of Britain and of compacted shales
from North America are given in Table 5.31. Unconfined compressive strength tests on Accra
Shales carried out by De Graft-Johnson et al. (1973) indicated that the samples usually failed
at strains between 1.5 and 3.5%. The compressive strengths varied from 200 kPa to 20 MPa.
Those samples that exhibited the high strengths were cemented types. Cemented shales not
only are stronger but they are more durable than compacted shales. In weak compaction
shales, cohesion may be lower than 15 kPa and the angle of friction as low as 5∞. In contrast,
Underwood (1967) quoted values of cohesion and angle of friction of 750 kPa and 56∞, respec-
tively, for dolomitic shales of Ordovician age, and 8–23 MPa and 45–64∞, respectively, for cal-
careous and quartzose shales from the Cambrian period. Generally, shales with a cohesion of
less than 20 kPa and angle of friction of less than 20∞are likely to present problems. The elas-
tic moduli of compaction shales range between 140 and 1400 MPa, whereas well-cemented
shales have elastic moduli in excess of 14,000 MPa.
The higher the degree of fissility possessed by shale, the greater is the anisotropy with regard
to strength, deformation and permeability. For instance, Wichter (1979) noted that in triaxial
testing, the strength parallel to the laminations was some 1.5–2 times less than that obtained
at right angles to it, for confining pressures of up to 1 MPa. Values of Young’s
modulus can be up to five times greater when shale is tested normal as opposed to parallel
to the direction of lamination.
Severe settlements may take place in low-grade compaction shales. Conversely, uplift fre-
quently occurs in excavations in shales and is attributable to swelling and heave. Rebound
on unloading of shales during excavation is attributed to heave due to the release of stored
strain energy. The greatest amount of rebound occurs in heavily overconsolidated compaction
shales. Sulphur compounds frequently are present in shales and mudstones. An expansion
265
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in volume large enough to cause structural damage can occur when sulphide minerals such
as pyrite and marcasite suffer oxidation to give anhydrous sulphates.
Clay shales usually have permeabilities of the order 1 ¥ 10- 8 m s- 1–10- 12 m s- 1. However,
sandy and silty shales and closely jointed cemented shales may have permeabilities as high
as 1 ¥ 10- 6m s- 1.
The greatest variation found in the engineering properties of mudrocks can be attributed to the
effects of weathering. Weathering ultimately returns mudrock to a normally consolidated
remoulded condition by destroying the bonds between particles. The lithological factors that
govern the durability of mudrocks include the degree of induration, the degree of fracturing and
lamination present, the grain size distribution and the mineralogical composition, especially the
nature of the clay mineral fraction. On exposure and weathering at the surface, the laminae
tend to separate, producing a fissile material that breaks down readily. Water can enter the rock
more easily, and successive wetting and drying leads to its fragmentation. Weathering may
take place preferentially along bedding planes in shales. For example, this has occurred along
some bedding planes in the shale of the Pietermaritzburg Formation in Durban, South Africa
(Bell and Lindsay, 1998). According to Bell and Maud (1996), this has given rise to the devel-
opment of thin layers of clay,often 3–5 mm in thickness. The much reduced shear strength of
these clay layers means that they represent preferential potential failure planes along which
sliding can occur in the shale. If mudrock undergoes desiccation, then air is drawn into the
outer pores and capillaries as high suction pressures develop. Then, on saturation, entrapped
air is pressurized as water is drawn into the rock by capillarity. Therefore, such slaking causes
the fabric of the rock to be stressed. Taylor (1988) maintained that disintegration takes place
as a consequence of air breakage after a sufficient number of cycles of wetting and drying.
Carbonates
The engineering properties of carbonate sediments are influenced by grain size and those
post-depositional changes that bring about induration. Because induration can take place at the
same time as deposition is occurring, this means that carbonate sediments can sustain high
overburden pressures that, in turn, means that they can retain high porosities to considerable
depths. Indeed, a layer of cemented grains may overlie one that is poorly cemented. Eventually,
however, high overburden pressure, creep and recrystallization produces crystalline limestone
with very low porosity. Limestone is perhaps more prone to pre- and post-consolidation
changes than any other rock type. For example, after burial, limestone can be modified to
such an extent that its original characteristics are obscured or even obliterated. The most
profound changes in composition and texture are those that lead to replacement of calcite
by dolomite (dolomitization and the formation of dolostone), silica, phosphate and so forth.
266
Chapter 5
Furthermore, carbonate rocks are susceptible to dissolution, which commonly removes shell
fragments. Many limestones exhibit evidence of increases in grain size and crystallinity with
increasing age of deposit.
Representative values of some physical properties of carbonate rocks are listed in Table 5.32.
It can be seen that generally the density of these rocks increases with age, whereas the
porosity is reduced. Diagenetic processes mainly account for the lower porosities of the older
limestones. The porosity has a highly significant influence on the unconfined compressive
Table 5.32. Some geomechanical properties of British carbonate rocks (after Bell, 1981)
Chee Tor Magnesium Lincolnshire Great
Limestone Limestone Limestone Oolite
Carboniferous Permian Jurassic Jurassic
(Buxton, (Whitwell, (Ancaster, (Corsham,
Derbyshire) Yorkshire) Lincolnshire) Wiltshire)
Dry density (Mg m- 3)
Range 2.55–2.61 2.46–2.58 2.09–2.38 1.91–2.21
Mean 2.58 2.51 2.27 1.98
Porosity (%)
Range 2.4–3.60 8.5–12.0 11.1–19.9 13.8–23.7
Mean 2.9 10.4 14.1 17.7
Dry unconfined
compressive strength
(MPa)
Range 65.2–170.9 34.6–69.6 17.6–38.7 8.9–20.1
Mean 106.2 54.6 28.4 15.6
Saturated unconfined
compressive strength
(MPa)
Range 56.1–131.6 25.6–49.4 10.7–22.4 7.8–10.4
Mean 83.9 36.6 16.8 9.3
Point load strength (MPa)
Range 1.9–3.5 2.2–3.1 1.2–2.9 0.6–1.2
Mean 2.8 2.7 1.9 0.9
Schmidt hammer hardness
Range 43–51 26–41 14–30 10–28
Mean 45 35 21 18
Young’s modulus (GPa)
Range 53.9–79.7 22.3–53.0 14.1–35.0 9.7–27.8
Mean 68.9 41.3 19.5 16.1
Permeability
(¥ 10- 8m s- 1)
Range 0.01–0.3 1.8–8.4 6.9–41.9 17.2–45.2
Mean 0.07 4.1 17.5 26.6
267
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
strength, that is, as the porosity increases, the strength declines. Fookes and Hawkins (1988)
mentioned that most Silurian, Devonian and Carboniferous limestones in Britain had at least a
compressive strength of over 50 MPa, whereas Jurassic and Cretaceous limestones were often
moderately weak, having unconfined compressive strength of less than 12.5 MPa. From Table
5.32, it can be seen that Carboniferous Limestone is generally very strong. Conversely, the
Great Oolite, Jurassic, is only just moderately strong. This table also indicates that the uncon-
fined compressive strength of the four limestones is reduced by saturation. The least reduction,
that is 21%, is undergone by the limestone of Carboniferous age, which is also the strongest.
The reduction in strength of the limestones from the Magnesium Limestone (Permian),
Lincolnshire Limestone (Jurassic) and Great Oolite (Jurassic) is, respectively, 35%, 40% and
42%. In other words, the strongest material underwent the least reduction on saturation, and
there was a progressive increase in the average percentage reduction undergone after satura-
tion as the dry strength of the limestones decreased, with the least strong material showing the
greatest reduction in strength. Similarly, the oldest limestones tend to possess the highest
values of Young’s modulus. Bell (1981) indicated that limestone from the Chee Tor Limestone
(Carboniferous) tended to behave as a brittle material, exhibiting elastic deformation almost to the
point of rupture, whereas limestone from the Magnesian Limestone, Lincolnshire Limestone and
Great Oolite underwent varying degrees of plastic–elastic–plastic deformation prior to failure.
When dolomitized, limestone undergoes an increase in porosity of a few percent and, there-
fore, tends to possess a lower compressive strength than limestone that has not been dolomi-
tized. For example, the Great Limestone of the north of England has a compressive strength
ranging from 110 to 210 MPa with an average porosity of 4%. When dolomitized, its average
porosity is 7.5% with a compressive strength of between 70 and 165 MPa. In fact, both
dolomitization and dedolomitization can give rise to increased porosity in rocks. Williams and
McNamara (1992) indicated that this can be responsible for lower compressive strength.
They quoted the mean unconfined compressive strength for fresh limestones, dolostones,
patchy dolostones and dedolostones from Cliff Dam site, Donegal, Ireland. These values
were, respectively, 73.06 MPa, 57.09 MPa, 33.88 MPa and 17.23 MPa.
An important effect of dissolution in limestone is enlargement of the pores that enhances
water circulation, thereby encouraging further dissolution. This brings about an increase in
stress within the remaining rock framework that reduces the strength of the rock mass and
leads to increasing stress corrosion. On loading, the volume of the voids is reduced by
fracture of the weakened cement between the particles and by the reorientation of the intact
aggregations of rock that become separated by loss of bonding. Most of the resultant settle-
ment takes place rapidly within a few days of the application of load.
Dissolution of limestone is a very slow process. Nevertheless, it may be accelerated by
man-made changes in groundwater conditions or by a change in the character of the surface
268
Chapter 5
water that drains into limestone. For instance, James and Kirkpatrick (1980) wrote that if such
dry discontinuous rocks are subjected to substantial hydraulic gradients, then they will
undergo dissolution along the discontinuities, leading to rapidly accelerating seepage rates.
Joints in limestone generally have been subjected to various degrees of dissolution so that
some may gape. Sinkholes may develop where joints intersect, and these may lead to an
integrated system of subterranean galleries and caverns. The latter are characteristic of thick
massive limestones. The progressive opening of discontinuities by dissolution leads to an
increase in mass permeability.
Generally, chalk is a remarkably pure limestone, containing over 95% calcium carbonate that
can be divided into coarse and fine fractions. The coarse fraction, which may constitute
20–30%, falls within the 40–100 m m range. This contains material derived from the mechan-
ical breakdown of large-shelled organisms and, to a lesser extent, from foraminifera. The fine
fraction, which takes the form of calcite particles that may be less than 1 m m in size, is
composed almost entirely of coccoliths and may form up to, and sometimes over, 80% of
certain horizons.
Chalk varies in hardness. For example, hard-grounds are present throughout much of the chalk
in England. These are horizons, which may be less than 1 m or up to 10 m in thickness, that
have undergone significant contemporaneous diagenetic hardening and densification. On the
other hand, the individual particles in soft chalk, such as that in southeast England, are bound
together at their points of contact by thin films of calcite. Such chalk contains only minute
amounts of cement. Early cementation prevented gravitational consolidation occurring in soft
chalk and helped retain high values of porosity. This contrasts with the Chalk in Yorkshire, in
which in excess of 50% of the voids are occupied by cement due to overburden pressure bring-
ing about pressure solution and precipitation of calcium carbonate (Bell et al., 1999). The Chalk
in Humberside and Lincolnshire has been strengthened and hardened similarly.
The dry density of chalk has a notable range, for example, low values have been recorded from
the Upper Chalk of Kent (1.35–1.64 Mg m- 3), whereas those from the Middle Chalk of Norfolk and
the Lower Chalk of Yorkshire frequently exceed 2.0 Mg m- 3. Distinction often is made between
hard and soft chalks on the basis of dry density. For example, Lord et al. (1994) suggested four
classes, namely, low density (<1.55 Mg m- 3), medium density (1.55–1.70 Mg m- 3), high
density (1.70–1.95 Mg m- 3) and very high density (>1.95 Mg m- 3). Chalk may have been
deposited with as much as 70–80% porosity. Approximately half this pore space was lost by
dewatering during the first tens to hundreds of metres of burial. Later, diagenetic processes
during consolidation and cementation may have reduced this to less than 5%, although the aver-
age porosity of chalk is between about 25 and 40%. Price et al. (1976) measured the median pore
diameters of Middle and Upper Chalk from Yorkshire, and obtained values of 0.39 and 0.41 m m,
respectively, whereas the corresponding values from southern England and East Anglia were
269
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
0.53 and 0.65 m m, respectively. Generally, larger pores were found in the Upper Chalk and in the
southern area. In southern England the median pore diameter in the Lower Chalk was 0.22 m m,
a feature attributed, in part, to a high marl content.
The permeability of chalk is governed by its discontinuity pattern rather than by intergranular
flow. As can be seen from the values given in Table 5.33, chalk has a high porosity but when
the values are compared with intergranular permeability the relationship is poor. The values
of primary permeability obtained by Bell et al. (1999) are more or less the same as those
found by Ineson (1962). Ineson quoted a range between 0.1 ¥ 10- 10and 25 ¥ 10- 9m s- 1. The
values provided by Bell et al. (1999) are shown in Table 5.33. The reason for the low primary
permeability is the small size of the pores and, more particularly, that of the interconnecting
throat areas. Price (1987) showed from mercury porosimeter testing that the median throat
diameter typically was less than 1 m m, and that throat diameters are smaller in chalks from
the north of England than in those from the south. Due to the operation of capillary and
molecular forces, drainage of the “larger” pores (according to Price, their median diameters
are approximately 5 m m) via such throats will not occur unless a suction on the order of 30 m
head of water (approximately 300 kPa) is applied. Since gravitational drainage represents a
suction of about 10 m, chalk has a very high specific retention.
The unconfined compressive strength of chalk ranges from moderately weak (much of the
Upper Chalk) to moderately strong (much of the Lower Chalk of Yorkshire and the Middle Chalk
of Norfolk). However, the unconfined compressive strength of chalk undergoes a marked
reduction when it is saturated (Bell et al., 1999). For instance, the Upper Chalk from Kent may
suffer a loss on saturation amounting to approximately 70%. Chalk compresses elastically up
to a critical pressure, the apparent preconsolidation pressure. Marked breakdown and
substantial consolidation occurs at higher pressures. The coefficients of consolidation, c,
v
and volume compressibility, m, are around 1135 m2a- 1and 0.019 m2MN- 1, respectively.
v
The Upper Chalk from Kent is particularly deformable, a typical value of Young’s modulus
being 5 ¥ 103 MPa. In fact, it exhibits elastic–plastic deformation, with perhaps incipient
creep prior to failure. The deformation properties of chalk in the field depend on its hard-
ness, and the spacing, tightness and orientation of its discontinuities. The values of Young’s
modulus also are influenced by the amount of weathering the chalk has undergone (Ward
et al., 1968).
Discontinuities are the fundamental factors governing the mass permeability of chalk. Chalk
also is subject to dissolution along discontinuities. However, subterranean solution features
generally tend not to develop in chalk since it is usually softer than limestone and, hence,
so collapses as solution occurs. Nevertheless, solution pipes and swallow holes are present
in chalk.
270
Chapter
5
Table 5.33. Some physical properties of chalk from Yorkshire, Norfolk and Kent, England (after Bell et al., 1999)
Yorkshire* Norfolk* Kent***
Lower Middle Upper Lower Melbourn Rock Middle Upper Upper
Dry density (Mg m- 3)
Maximum 2.13 (L) 2.30 (M) 2.23 (M) 2.17 (L) 2.23 (M) 1.81 (L) 1.70 (VL) 1.61 (VL)
Minimum 1.85 (L) 1.76 (VL) 1.77 (VL) 1.71 (VL) 2.04 (L) 1.62 (VL) 1.54 (VL) 1.35 (VL)
Mean 2.08 (L) 2.14 (L) 2.06 (L) 1.99 (L) 2.17 (L) 1.76 (VL) 1.61 (VL) 1.44 (VL)
Effective porosity
(%)(Saturation method)
Maximum 30.2 (VH) 35.0 (VH) 36.4 (VH) 34.4 (VH) 27.0 (H) 38.2 (VH) 43.2 (VH) 45.7 (VH)
Minimum 17.2 (H) 16.2 (H) 17.7 (H) 19.9 (H) 16.1 (H) 30.2 (VH) 34.3 (VH) 29.6 (H)
Mean 20.6 (H) 21.8 (H) 23.9 (H) 26.5 (H) 19.8 (H) 34.4 (VH) 39.9 (VH) 41.7 (VH)
Permeability (¥ 10- 9m s- 1)
Maximum 1.2 2.2 37.0
Minimum 0.3 0.5 13.9
Mean 0.9 1.4 27.7
Dry unconfined
compressive
strength (MPa)**
Maximum 32.7 (MS) 36.4 (MS) 34.0 (MS) 30.5 (MS) 38,3 (MS) 25.1 (MS) 12.7 (MS) 6.2 (MW)
Minimum 19.1 (MS) 25.2 (MS) 18.1 (MS) 14.2 (MS) 22.1 (MS) 7.4 (MW) 6.9 (MW) 4.8 (W)
Mean 26.4 (MS) 30.7 (MS) 25.6 (MS) 21.0 (MS) 29.1 (MS) 13.0 (MS) 9.5 (MW) 5.5 (MW)
Saturated unconfined
compressive strength
(MPa)
Maximum 16.2 20.4 15.9 13.7 17.5 10.3 5.1 2.2
Minimum 8.6 11.7 7.4 6.2 8.9 3.1 2.8 1.4
Mean 13.7 16.8 11.9 10.7 14.3 5.8 3.6 1.7
Continued 271
E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 5.33. Some physical properties of chalk from Yorkshire, Norfolk and Kent, England (after Bell et al., 1999)—Cont’d
Yorkshire* Norfolk* Kent***
Lower Middle Upper Lower Melbourn Rock Middle Upper Upper
Reduction of strength on 53 47 55 53 54 57 60 69
saturation (%)
Point load strength
(MPa)***
Maximum 1.8 (HS) 2.1 (HS) 2.0 (HS) 1,5 (HS) 2.4 (HS) — — —
Minimum 0.3 (MS) 0.6 (MS) 0.2 (LS) 0.2 (LS) 0.4 (MS) — — —
Mean 1.4 (MS) 1.7 (HS) 1.2 (HS) 0.8 (MS) 1.7 (HS) — — —
Young’s modulus (t GPa)
50
Maximum 18.4 21.7 17.1 14.1 18.9 10.4 8.2 4.6
Minimum 7.5 9.1 7.4 6.8 7.3 5.0 4.1 4.2
Mean 12.7 15.2 11.7 8.7 13.5 8.4 6.7 4.4
Note: Dry density VL =very low, less than 1.8 Mg m-3; L =1.8–2.2 Mg m-3; M =moderate, over 2.2. Mg m-3; Porosity H =high, 15–30%; VH =very high,
over 30% (Anon, 1979). Unconfined compressive strength: W =weak, 1.25–5 MPa; MW =moderately weak, 5–12.5 MPa; MS =moderately strong, 12.5 to
50 MPa (Anon, 1977). Point load strength: LS =low strength, 0.1–0.3 MPa; MS =moderate strength,, 0.3–1 MPa; HS =high strength,
1–3 MPa (Franklin and Broch, 1972).
*Yorkshire: Lower—H. subglobosus(? =S. gracile) zone near Speeton; Middle — T. latazone, Thornwick Bay; Upper—M. coranguinumzone, Selwicks
Bay.
**Norfolk: Lower—S. varians(? =M. mantelli) zone, Hunstanton; Melbourn Rock and Middle—T. lata zone, Hilllington; Upper M. coranguinumzone,
Burnham Market.
***Kent: Upper—M. coranguinumzone, Northfleet.
272
Chapter 5
Evaporites
The dry densities of gypsum and anhydrite are given in Table 5.34, as are porosity values.
There is little difference between the dry densities of anhydrite, and the range of values for
the samples of gypsum also is low. The values of dry density of anhydrite are high, while
those of gypsum are moderate, according to Anon (1979). Anhydrite is a strong rock, and
gypsum is moderately strong. It would appear, however, that the purity of gypsum does have
some influence on strength, as at Kirby Thore, the A bed was stronger than the purer B bed,
and at Hawton, the grade 3 gypsum, which contained the most impurity, possessed the high-
est strengths among the samples tested (Table 5.34). It has been suggested by Skinner
(1959) that impurities in calcium sulphate rocks tend to reduce the crystal size and that the
strength increases with decreasing crystal size. Subsequently, Papadopoulos et al. (1994)
investigated the influence of crystal size on the geotechnical properties of gypsum from
Crete. They chose fine-grained alabaster, which probably was of basin deposition formed as
a result of evaporation; medium-grained gypsum of secondary diagenetic origin; and large
selenite crystals of primary displacement precipitation set in a host sediment. The point load
test and unconfined compression test showed that alabaster had the highest strength, that is,
that the finest-grained material was the strongest. The medium-grained gypsum possessed
the least strength, with the selenitic material being somewhat stronger. Bell (1994) assessed
the tensile strength of samples of anhydrite and gypsum indirectly by means of the point load
test. All samples of anhydrite had a very high strength, whereas those of gypsum varied from
low to high. Again, it appeared that the purer varieties possessed the lower strengths. Plastic
deformation generally occurs at an earlier stage during the loading process in gypsum than
it does in anhydrite. The values of Young’s modulus are generally significantly higher for
anhydrite than for gypsum. Indeed, if the average values of the two rock types are compared,
then the E values of anhydrite tested by Bell tended to be at least twice those of gypsum
(Table 5.34). In other words, the deformability of anhydrite is either very low or low, whereas
that of gypsum varies from low to high.
Samples of anhydrite and gypsum were subjected to incremental loading creep tests and
gypsum to conventional creep tests by Bell (1994). In both rocks, the amount of creep under-
gone in the incremental loading tests usually increased with increasing levels of constant
loading. When gypsum was subjected to conventional creep tests, it underwent instantaneous
elastic strain and then primary creep at a reasonably rapid but decelerating rate. This was
followed by secondary creep at a low or near-constant strain rate.
The unconfined compressive strength of rock salt (halite) is generally moderately weak (9–15
MPa). A similar indication of strength is given by the point load test. Bell (1981) found that
when halite was saturated with paraffin, the unconfined compressive strength suffered an
average reduction of over 40%. Turning to Young’s modulus, the values (e.g. 2–6.5 GPa)
273
274 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 5.34. Geomechanical properties of anhydrite and gypsum, from the north and midlands of England, range and average values
(after Bell, 1994c)
Gypsum
Anhydrite Kirby Thore
Sherburn- Hawton
Sandwich Newbiggin Bed A Bed B in-Elmet Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3
Dry density 2.77–2.82 2.74–2.84 2.16–2.33 2.19–2.32 2.16–2.32 2.21–2.24 2.23–2.26 2.22–2.24
(Mg m- 3) 2.79 2.78 2.29 2.24 2.21 2.22 2.25 2.23
Effective 3.1–3.7 3.0–3.5 3.6–4.6 3.9–7.0 3.4–9.1 1.5–5.0 2.8–4.4 3.5–6.6
porosity (%) 3.3 2.9 4 4.4 5.1 2.3 3.2 3.8
Permeability 0.4–3.0 ¥ 10- 8 1.2–3.6 ¥ 10- 8 3.1–8.0 ¥ 10- 7 6.2–8.6 ¥ 10- 7 4.0 ¥ 10- 7– 3.2–6.6 ¥ 2.3–5.3 ¥ 8.9–11.8 ¥
(m s- 1) 1.6 ¥ 10- 8 3.0 ¥ 10- 8 6.2 ¥ 10- 7 7.4 ¥ 10- 7 12.6 ¥ 10- 7 10- 8 10- 7 10- 7
9.6 ¥ 10- 7 4.8 ¥ 10- 8 3.65 ¥ 10- 7 10.6 ¥ 10- 7
Unconfined 77.9–126.8 66.1–120.8 28.1–42.4 16.3–36.6 19.0–40.8 12.2–28.0 14.9–24.3 14.0–34.9
compressive 102.9 97.5 34.8 24.6 27.5 18.2 21.6 24.1
strength (MPa)
Point load 3.4–4.9 3.0–4.6 1.8–2.5 1.1–1.8 0.9–2.4 0.21–1.85 1.15–1.69 0.4–2.42
strength (MPa) 4.0 3.4 2.0 1.5 1.9 1.34 1.40 1.65
Schmidt 36–43 33–40 20–28 18–26 17–34 0–14 0–17 6–22
hammer 37 35 23 20 20 8 8 12
hardness
Young’s 57.0–86.4 48.8–83.0 18.1–46.8 13.2–27.6 15.6–36.0 14.2–19.3 14.9–21.1 16.3–24.7
modulus 78.7 69.4 35.3 23.3 24.8 16.6 19.5 21.4
(GPa) (Et )
50
Chapter 5
suggest that the rock is either very highly or highly deformable. In rock salt, the yield strength
may be as little as one-tenth the ultimate compressive strength. Creep may account for any-
thing between 20 and 60% of the strain at failure when rock salt is subjected to incremental
creep tests. Rock salt is the most prone to creep of the evaporitic rocks.
Gypsum is more readily soluble than limestone; 2100 mg l- 1 can be dissolved in non-saline
waters as compared with 400 mg l- 1 of limestone. Sinkholes and caverns can, therefore,
develop in thick beds of gypsum more rapidly than they can in limestone. Cavern collapse
has led to extensive cracking and subsidence at the ground surface. The problem is accen-
tuated by the fact that gypsum is weaker than limestone and, therefore, collapses more read-
ily. Rahn and Davis (1996) referred to the presence of sinkholes and caves in gypsum in the
Rapid City area, South Dakota. Their presence has led to subsidence problems and, in some
instances, sinkholes have collapsed suddenly. Cooper (1995) also commented on subsi-
dence hazards due to the dissolution of gypsum. He maintained that natural rates of gypsum
dissolution in the Ripon area of North Yorkshire, England, agreed with rates determined in
the laboratory and elsewhere in the field. Furthermore, he added that the dissolution rate of
gypsum from the sides of phreatic caves could be as high as 0.5–1 m per year under
favourable flowing-water conditions. Many of the collapses have occurred after flooding or
periods of prolonged rain, making their appearance within minutes. Where beds of gypsum
approach the surface, their presence can be traced by broad funnel-shaped sinkholes formed
by the collapse of overlying mudstone into areas from which gypsum has been removed by
solution. Karstic features also have been described by Yuzer (1982) from the Sivas area of
Turkey. Massive anhydrite can be dissolved to produce uncontrollable runaway situations in
which seepage flow rates increase in a rapidly accelerating manner (James and Kirkpatrick,
1980).
Heave is another problem associated with anhydrite. This takes place when anhydrite is
hydrated to form gypsum. In so doing, there is a volume increase of between 30 and 58%
that exerts pressures that have been variously estimated between 2 and 69 MPa. It is thought
that no great length of time is required to bring about such hydration. When it occurs at shal-
low depths, it causes expansion but the process is gradual and usually is accompanied by
the removal of gypsum in solution. At greater depths, anhydrite is effectively confined during
the process. This results in a gradual build-up of pressure and finally the stress is liberated
in a rapid manner.
Rock salt is even more soluble than gypsum, and the evidence of slumping, brecciation and
collapse structures in rocks that overlie saliferous strata bear witness to the fact that rock salt
has gone into solution in past geological times. It generally is believed, however, that in humid
regions that are underlain by saliferous beds, measurable surface subsidence is unlikely to
occur, except where salt is being extracted. Perhaps this is because equilibrium has been
275
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
attained between the supply of unsaturated groundwater and the rock salt available for
solution. Nonetheless, cases have been recorded of rapid subsidence, such as the “Meade
salt sink” in Kansas. This area of water, about 60 m in diameter, formed as a result of rapid
subsidence in March 1879. Neal (1995) mentioned that more than 300 sinkholes, fissures
and depressions are associated with the salt karst zone of the arid area of northeastern
Arizona. Neal also mentioned salt karst in other evaporite basins such as in New Mexico,
west Texas and Kansas.
276
Chapter 6
Geological Materials Used in Construction
Building or Dimension Stone
Stone has been used as a construction material for thousands of years. One of the
reasons for this was its ready availability locally. Furthermore, stone requires little
energy for extraction and processing. Indeed, stone is used more or less as it is
found except for the seasoning, shaping and dressing that is necessary before it is used for
building purposes.
A number of factors determine whether a rock will be worked as a building stone. These
include the volume of material that can be quarried; the ease with which it can be quarried;
the wastage consequent upon quarrying; and the cost of transportation; as well as its appear-
ance and physical properties (Yavuz et al., 2005). As far as volume is concerned, the life of
the quarry should be at least 20 years. The amount of overburden that has to be removed
also affects the economics of quarrying. Obviously, there comes a point when removal of
overburden makes operations uneconomic. However, at that point, stone may be mined if
conditions are favourable. Weathered rock normally represents waste therefore the ratio of
fresh to weathered rock is another factor of economic importance. The ease with which a rock
can be quarried depends to a large extent on geological structures, notably the geometry of
joints and bedding planes, where present. Ideally, rock for building stone should be massive,
certainly it must be free from closely spaced joints or other discontinuities as these control
block size. The stone should be free of fractures and other flaws. In the case of sedimentary
rocks, where beds dip steeply, quarrying has to take place along the strike. Steeply dipping
rocks can also give rise to problems of slope stability when excavated. On the other hand,
if beds of rock dip gently, it is advantageous to develop the quarry floor along the bedding
planes. The massive nature of igneous rocks such as granite means that a quarry can be
developed in any direction, within the constraints of planning permission.
A uniform appearance is generally desirable in building stone. The appearance of a stone
largely depends on its colour, which is determined by its mineral composition. Texture also
affects the appearance of a stone, as does the way in which it weathers. For example,
the weathering of some minerals, such as pyrite, may produce ghastly stains. Generally
speaking, rocks of light colour are used as building stone.
277
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The texture and porosity of a rock affect its ease of dressing, and the amount of expansion,
freezing and dissolution it may undergo. For example, fine-grained rocks are more easily
dressed than coarse varieties. The retention of water in a rock with small pores is greater
than in one with large pores and so they are more prone to frost attack.
For usual building purposes, a compressive strength of 35 MPa is satisfactory, and the
strength of most rocks used for building stone is well in excess of this figure (Table6.1 and
Table 6.2). In certain instances, tensile strength is important, for example, tensile stresses
may be generated in a stone subjected to ground movements. However, the tensile strength
of a rock, or more particularly its resistance to bending, is a fraction of its compressive
strength. As far as building stone is concerned, hardness is a factor of small consequence,
except where a stone is subjected to continual wear, such as in steps or pavings.
The durability of a stone is a measure of its ability to resist weathering and so to retain its
original size, shape, strength and appearance over an extensive period of time. It is one of
the most important factors that determines whether or not a rock will be worked for building
stone (Sims, 1991). The amount of weathering undergone by a rock in field exposures or
quarries affords some indication of its qualities of resistance. However, there is no guarantee
that the durability is the same throughout a rock mass and, if it changes, it is far more
difficult to detect, for example, than a change in colour.
According to Leary (1986), one of the tests that is frequently used in Britain to make an
initial assessment of the durability of sandstone as a building material is the acid immersion
test. This involves immersing specimens for 10 days in sulphuric acid of density 1.145 Mg m- 3.
Stones that are unaffected by the test are regarded as being resistant to attack by acidic rain-
water. Those stones that fail are not recommended for external use in polluted environments.
A more severe test consists of immersing specimens in sulphuric acid with a density of
1.306 Mg m- 3. Experience has shown that this test is of particular value when the design life
of a proposed building is exceptionally long. If a stone survives the acid immersion test intact,
then it is subjected to a crystallization test. The crystallization test uses either magnesium or
sodium sulphate. There are two types of test, namely, the severe test and the mild test.
The former test uses a saturated solution that is very aggressive and is only recommended
for use when the natural weathering conditions are particularly severe, or the stone is
expected to have a particularly long life. The mild test uses a 15% solution. The specimens
are subjected to 15 cycles of immersion and, after final washing to remove sulphate and
drying, are weighed to determine the weight loss. The results are reported in terms of weight
loss, expressed as a percentage of the initial dry weight, or as the number of cycles required
to produce failure if a specimen is too fractured to be weighed before the fifteenth cycle has
been completed. Conclusions relating to durability are obtained by comparing the results of
the tests with the performance of stone of known weathering behaviour. This unfortunately is
278
Chapter 6
one of the shortcomings of the test since specific reference stones are seldom available.
Leary used the two types of acid immersion test and two types of crystallization test to
classify sandstones into six grades, as follows:
1. Class A sandstones pass a severe acid immersion test and a severe crystalli-
zation test.
2. Class B sandstones pass a mild acid immersion test and a severe crystallization
test.
3. Class C sandstones pass a severe acid immersion test and a mild crystallization
test.
4. Class D sandstones pass a severe acid immersion test but fail a mild crystalliza-
tion test.
5. Class E sandstones pass a mild acid immersion test but fail a mild crystalliza-
tion test.
6. Class F sandstones fail a mild acid immersion test and a mild crystallization test.
Damage can occur to stone by alternate wetting and drying. What is more, water in the pores
of a stone of low tensile strength can expand enough when warmed to cause its disruption.
For example, when the temperature of water is raised from 0 to 60∞C, it expands some
1.5%, and this can exert a pressure of up to 52 MPa in the pores of a rock. Indeed, water can
cause expansion within granite ranging from 0.004 to 0.009%, in marble from 0.001 to
0.0025% and in quartz arenites (sandstones) from 0.01 to 0.044%. The stresses imposed
on masonry by expansion and contraction, brought about by changes in temperature and
moisture content, can result in masonry between abutments spalling at the joints, blocks may
even be shattered and fall out of place.
Frost damage is one of the major factors causing deterioration in a building stone (Ingham,
2005). Sometimes, small fragments are separated from the surface of a stone due to frost
action but the major effect is gross fracture. Frost damage is most likely to occur on steps,
copings, cills and cornices where rain and snow can collect. Damage to susceptible stone may
be reduced if it is placed in a sheltered location. Most igneous rocks, and the better quality
sandstones and limestones, are immune. As far as frost susceptibility is concerned, the
porosity, tortuosity, pore size and degree of saturation all play an important role. As water
turns to ice, it increases in volume, thus giving rise to an increase in pressure within the
pores. This action is further enhanced by the displacement of pore water away from the
developing ice front. Once ice has formed, the ice pressure rapidly increases with decreas-
ing temperature, so that at approximately - 22∞C, ice can exert a pressure of 200 MPa
(Winkler, 1973). Usually, coarse-grained rocks withstand freezing better than the
fine-grained types. Indeed, the critical pore size for freeze–thaw durability appears to be
about 0.005 mm. In other words, rocks with larger mean pore diameters allow outward
279
280 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 6.1. Some properties of British sandstones used for building purposes (after Bell, 1992a)
Unconfined
compres- Satu-
Dry sive Young’s Acid Crystal- ration Durability
Specific density Porosity strength modulus immersion lization coeffi- classifi-
Stone Colour Grain Size gravity (Mg m- 3) (%) (MPa) (GPa) test* test cient cation
Hollington Pink to Fine to 2.71 2.04 23.5 29 13.6 Passed F9 0.71 D
Trias red, medium
Near mottled grained
Uttoxeter buff
Lazonby Dark Fine to 2.68 2.38 9.3 40 21.8 Passed 37 0.47 B,C
Permian pink medium
Near to red grained
Penrith
Delph Grey to Fine to 2.68 2.33 13.5 62 36.8 Passed 33 0.63 B,C
Coal deep medium
Measures buff grained
Wingerworth
Ladycross Light Fine to 2.69 2.36 11.6 82 41.2 Passed 9 0.62 A
Coal grey medium
Measures to buff grained
Near
Hexham
Birchover Buff to Medium 2.69 2.34 12.4 48 25.6 Passed 40 0.65 B,C
Namurian pink to coarse
Near grained
Matlock
281
Chapter
6
Stancliffe Buff Fine to
Namurian medium 2.67 2.38 11.5 72 41.5 Passed 20 0.63 A,B
Near grained
Matlock
Blaxter Buff Fine to 2.67 2.24 16.6 50 35.4 Passed 56 0.59 B,C
Lr medium
Carboniferous grained
Elsdon
Monmouth Red to Fine to 2.69 2.43 8.8 22 17.4 Failed 0.59 E,F
—
Old Red pinkish medium
Sandstone brown grained
Note:Leary (1986) used combinations of severe and mild acid immersion crystallization tests to classify sandstones into six grades of durability, A passed
both severe tests whereas F failed both mild tests.
* The acid immersion test involves immersing specimens for 10 days in sulphuric acid. Stones that are unaffected are regarded as being resistant to attack
by acidic rainwater. Those stones that fail are not recommended for external use in polluted environments.
**The crystallization test uses either magnesium or sodium sulphate. The specimens are subjected to 15 cycles of immersion and, after final washing to
remove sulphate and subsequent drying, are weighed to determine the weight loss. The results are reported in terms of weight loss, expressed as a
percentage of the initial dry weight, or as the number of cycles required to produce failure if a specimen is too fractured to be weighed before the
fifteenth cycle has been completed.
282 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 6.2. Some properties of British limestones used for building purposes (after Bell, 1993)
Stone Orton Scar Anstone Doulting Ancaster Bath Portland Purbeck
Age Lr. Carboniferous Magnesian Inferior Lincolnshire Great Oolite Portland Purbeck
Limestone Oolite Limestone
Location Orton Kiveton Park Shepton Ancaster Monks Park Isle of Swanage
Mallet Portland
Specific gravity 2.72 2.83 2.7 2.7 2.71 2.7 2.7
Dry density (Mg m- 3) 2.59 2.51 2.34 2.27 2.3 2.25 2.21
Porosity (%) 4.4 10.4 12.8 19.3 18.3 22.4 9.6
Microporosity 54 23 30 60 77 43 62
(% saturation)
Saturation 0.68 0.64 0.69 0.84 0.94 0.58 0.62
coefficient
Unconfined 96.4 54.6 35.6 28.4 15.6 20.2 24.1
compressive
strength (MPa)
Young’s modulus 60.9 41.3 24.1 19.5 16.1 17.0 17.4
(GPa)
Velocity of 4800 3600 2900 2900 2800 3000 3700
sound (m s- 1)
Crystallization 1 5 8 20 52 13 3
test (% wt loss)
Durability A B C D E C B
classification*
*A =excellent; E =performs best in sheltered positions in inland locations where pollution is low and frost activity infrequent; F =generally unsatisfactory.
Chapter 6
drainage and escape of moisture from the frontal advance of the ice line and, therefore, are
less frost susceptible. Fine-grained rocks that have over 5% sorbed water are often very
susceptible to frost damage, whereas those containing less than 1% are very durable.
Freezing tests have proved an unsatisfactory method of assessing frost resistance. Capillary
tests have been used in France and Belgium to assess the frost susceptibility of building
stone, whereas in Britain, a crystallization test has been used (Anon, 1983).
Deleterious salts, when present in a building stone, are generally derived from the ground
or the atmosphere, although soluble salts may occur in the pores of the parental rock.
Their presence in a stone gives rise to different effects. They may cause efflorescence by
crystallizing on the surface of a stone. In subflorescence, crystallization takes place just
below the surface and may be responsible for surface scabbing. The pressures produced
by crystallization of salts in small pores are appreciable, for instance, halite (NaCl) exerts a
pressure of 200 MPa; gypsum (CaSO ◊nH O), 100 MPa; anhydrite (CaSO ), 120 MPa and
4 2 4
kieserite (MgSO ◊nH O), 100 MPa; and are often sufficient to cause disruption. Crystallization
4 2
caused by freely soluble salts such as sodium chloride, sodium sulphate or sodium hydrox-
ide can lead to the surface of a stone crumbling or powdering. Deep cavities may be formed
in magnesian limestone when it is attacked by magnesium sulphate (Fig. 6.1). Salt action can
Figure 6.1
Acavity formed in magnesian limestone, parish church, Retford, Nottinghamshire, England.
283
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
give rise to honeycomb weathering in some sandstones and porous limestones (Fig. 3.3).
Disruption in stone also may take place due to the considerable contrasts in thermal expan-
sion of salts in the pores. For instance, halite expands by some 0.5% from 0 to 60∞C, and
this may aid the decay of stone. Conversely, surface induration of a stone by the precipita-
tion of salts may give rise to a protective hard crust, that is, case hardening. If the stone is
the sole supplier of these salts, then the interior is correspondingly weaker.
The rate of weathering of silicate rocks is usually slow, although once weathering penetrates
the rock, the rate accelerates. Even so, building stones that are cut from igneous rocks
generally suffer negligible decay in climates such as that of Britain. By contrast, some basalts
used in Germany have proved exceptional in this respect in that they have deteriorated rap-
idly, crumbling after about 5 years of exposure. On petrological examination, these basalts
were found to contain analcite, the development within which of micro-cracks is presumed to
have produced the deterioration. Such basalts have been referred to as sun-burnt basalts.
Haskins and Bell (1995) commented on the rapid breakdown of some basalts on exposure
and attributed this to the presence of smectitic clay minerals formed by the deuteric alteration
of primary minerals, the clay minerals swelling and shrinking on wetting and drying, respec-
tively (see Chapter 5). This type of basalt has been termed slaking basalt. Some igneous
stones weather a different colour. For example, within several weeks, some light grey
granites may alter to various shades of pink, red, brown or yellow. This is caused by the
hydration of the iron oxides in them.
Building stones derived from sedimentary rocks may undergo a varying amount of decay in
urban atmospheres, where weathering is accelerated due to the presence of aggressive
impurities such as SO , SO , NO , Cl and CO in the air, which produce corrosive acids.
2 3 3 2 2
Limestones are the most suspect. For instance, weak sulphuric acid reacts with the calcium
carbonate of limestones to produce calcium sulphate. The latter often forms just below the
surface of a stone and the expansion that takes place upon crystallization causes slight
disruption. If this reaction continues, then the outer surface of the limestone begins to flake
off. In the more sheltered parts of a building, such as under ledges or in protected areas of
decoration, calcium sulphate remains in position to form hard black crusts (Butlin et al.,
1985). Black crusts are a mixture of gypsum and soot particles. They have a dramatic effect
on the appearance of buildings (Fig. 6.2). Scanning electron microscope studies have shown
that black crusts have an open crystalline structure that permits penetration of moisture.
This moisture can carry dissolved salts into the stone with further disruptive consequences.
The degree of resistance that sandstone offers to weathering depends on its mineralogical
composition, texture, porosity, amount and type of cement/matrix, and the presence of any
planes of weakness. Accordingly, the best type of sandstone for external use for building
purposes is a quartz arenite that is well bonded with siliceous cement, has a low porosity and
284
Chapter 6
Figure 6.2
Black crust developed on a column of limestone, Lincoln cathedral, Lincoln, England.
is free from visible laminations. The tougher the stone, however, the more expensive it is to
dress. Sandstones are chiefly composed of quartz grains that are highly resistant to weath-
ering but other minerals present in lesser amounts may be suspect, for example, feldspars
may be kaolinized. Calcareous cements react with weak acids in urban atmospheres, as do
iron oxides that produce rusty surface stains. The reactions caused by acid attack may lead
occasionally to the surface of a stone flaking off irregularly or, in extreme cases, to it
crumbling. Laminated sandstone usually weathers badly when it is used in the exposed parts
of buildings, it decaying in patches.
Exposure of a stone to intense heating causes expansion of its component minerals with
subsequent exfoliation at its surface. The most suspect rocks in this respect appear to be
those that contain high proportions of quartz and alkali feldspars, such as granites and sand-
stones. Indeed, quartz is one of the most expansive minerals, expanding by 3.76% between
285
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
normal temperatures and 570∞C. When limestones and marbles are heated to 900∞C or dolo-
stones to 800∞C, superficial calcination begins to produce surface scars. Generally speaking,
finely textured rocks offer a higher degree of heat resistance than do coarse-grained
varieties.
Stone preservation involves the use of chemical treatments that prolong the life of a stone,
either by preventing or retarding the progress of stone decay or by restoring the physical
integrity of the decayed stone (Bell and Coulthard, 1990). A stone preservative, therefore,
may be defined as a material that, when applied, will avert or compensate for the harmful
effects of time and the environment. When applied, the preservative must not change the
natural appearance or architectural value of the stone to any appreciable extent.
In some cases, stone may be obtained by splitting along the bedding and/or joint surfaces by
using a wedge and feathers. Another method of quarrying rock for building stone consists of
drilling a series of closely spaced holes (often with as little as 25 mm between them) in line
in order to split a large block from the face. Stone also may be cut from the quarry face by
using a wire saw or diamond-impregnated wire. Flame cutting has been used primarily for
winning granitic rocks. It is claimed that this technique is the only way of cutting stone in areas
of high stress relief. If explosives are used to work building stone, then the blast should only
weaken the rock along joint and/or bedding planes, and not fracture the material. The object
is to obtain blocks of large dimensions that can be sawn to size. Hence, the blasting pattern
and amount of charge (black powder) are very important, and every effort should be made to
keep rock wastage and hair cracking to a minimum.
When stone is won from a quarry, it contains a certain amount of pore water referred to as
quarry sap. As this dries out, it causes the stone to harden. Consequently, it is wise to shape
the stone as soon as possible after it has been got from the quarry. Blocks are first sawn to
the required size, after which they may be planed or turned, before final finishing. Careless
operation of dressing machines or tooling of the stone may produce bruising. Subsequently,
scaling may develop at points where the stone was bruised, spoiling its appearance.
Granite is ideally suited for building, engineering and monumental purposes. Its crushing
strength varies between 160 and 240 MPa. It has exceptional weathering properties, and
most granites are virtually indestructible under normal climatic conditions. There are exam-
ples of granite polished over 100 years ago on which the polish has not deteriorated to any
significant extent. Indeed, it is accepted that the polish on granite is such that it is only after
exposure to very heavily polluted atmospheres, for a considerable length of time, that any
sign of deterioration becomes apparent. The maintenance cost of granite as compared with
other materials is therefore very much less and, in most cases, there is no maintenance cost
at all for a considerable number of years.
286
Chapter 6
Limestones show a variation in their colour, texture and porosity, and those that are fossilif-
erous are highly attractive when cut and polished. However, carbonate stone can undergo
dissolution by acidified water. This results in dulling of polish, surface discolouration and
structural weakening. Carvings and decoration are subdued and may eventually disappear;
natural features such as grain, fossils, etc., are emboldened (Fig. 6.3).
The colour and strength of sandstone are largely attributable to the type and amount
of cement binding the constituent grains. The cement content also influences the porosity
and, therefore, water absorption. Sandstones that are used for building purposes are
found in most of the geological systems, the exception being those of the Cainozoic era.
The sandstones of this age are generally too soft and friable to be of value.
Roofing and Facing Materials
Rocks used for roofing purposes must possess a sufficient degree of fissility to allow them
to split into thin slabs, in addition to being durable and impermeable. Consequently, slate is
one of the best roofing materials available and has been used extensively. Today, however,
more and more tiles are being used for roofing, these being cheaper than stone, which has
to be quarried and cut to size.
Figure 6.3
Weathered limestone gargoyle and scabbing of stone, Seville cathedral, Spain.
287
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Slates are derived from argillaceous rocks that, because they were involved in major earth
movements, were metamorphosed. They are characterized by their cleavage, which allows
the rock to break into thin slabs. Some slates, however, may possess a grain that runs at an
angle to the cleavage planes and may tend to fracture along it. Thus, in slate used for
roofing purposes, the grain should run along its length. Welsh slates are differently coloured;
they may be grey, blue, purple, red or mottled. The green coloured slates of the Lake District,
England, are obtained from the Borrowdale Volcanic Series and are, in fact, cleaved tuffs.
They are somewhat coarser grained than Welsh slates but more attractive. As noted earlier,
the colour of slate varies. Red slates contain more than twice as much ferric as ferrous oxide.
A slate may be greenish coloured if the reverse is the case. Manganese is responsible for the
purplish colour of some slates. Blue and grey slates contain little ferric oxide.
The specific gravity of a slate is about 2.7 to 2.9, with an approximate density of 2.59 Mg m- 3.
The maximum permissible water absorption of a slate is 0.37%. Calcium carbonate may be
present in some slates of inferior quality that may result in them flaking and eventually
crumbling upon weathering. Accordingly, a sulphuric acid test is used to test their quality.
Top quality slates, which can be used under moderate to severe atmospheric pollution
conditions, reveal no signs of flaking, lamination or swelling after the test.
There is a large amount of wastage when explosives are used to quarry slate. Accordingly,
they are sometimes quarried by using a wire saw. The slate, once won, is sawn into blocks,
and then into slabs about 75 mm thick. These slabs are split into slate tiles by hand. Riven
facing stones are also produced in the same way (Fig. 6.4).
Today, an increasingly frequent method of using stone is as relatively thin slabs, applied as
a facing to a building to enhance its appearance. Facing stone also provides a protective cov-
ering. Various thicknesses are used, from 20 mm in the case of granite, marble and slate in
certain positions at ground-floor level, up to 40 mm at first-floor level or above. If granite or
syenite is used as a facing stone, then it should not be overdried, but should retain some
quarry sap, otherwise it becomes too tough and hard to fabricate. As far as limestones and
sandstones are concerned, the slabs are somewhat thicker, that is, varying between 50 and
100 mm. Because of their comparative thinness, facing stones should not be too rigidly fixed;
otherwise, differential expansion, due to changing temperatures, can produce cracking
(Smith, 1999).
When fissile stones are used as facing stone and are given a riven or honed finish, they are
extremely attractive. Facing stones usually have a polished finish, then they are even more
attractive, the polished finish enhancing the textural features of the stone. Polishing is
accomplished by carborundum-impregnated discs that rotate over the surface of the stone,
successively finer discs being used to produce the final finish (Fig. 6.5). The discs are cooled
288
Chapter 6
Figure 6.4
Coarse-grained “greenslate” being split by hand for facing stone, producing a riven finish. Broughton Moor, Cumbria,
England.
and lubricated by water. A flame-textured finish can be produced by moving a small,
high-temperature flame across the flat surface of a stone, which causes the surface to spall,
thereby giving a rippled effect. Facing stones are almost self-cleansing.
Rocks used for facing stones should have a high tensile strength in order to resist cracking.
The high tensile strength also means that thermal expansion is not a great problem when
slabs are spread over large faces.
Armourstone
Armourstone refers to large blocks of rock that are used to protect civil engineering
structures. Large blocks of rock, which may be single-size or, more frequently, widely graded
(rip-rap), are used to protect the upstream face of dams against wave action. They are
also used in the construction of river training schemes, in river bank and bed protection
289
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 6.5
Carboniferous limestone being polished for facing stone, Orton, Cumbria, England.
and stabilization, as well as in the prevention of scour around bridge piers. Armourstone is
used in coastal engineering for the construction of rubble mound breakwaters, for revetment
covering embankments, for the protection of sea walls, and for rubble rock groynes. Indeed,
breakwaters and sea defences represent a major use of armourstone. As the marine
environment is one of the most aggressive in which construction occurs, armourstone must
afford stability against wave action, accordingly block size and density are all important
(Fookes and Poole, 1981). Shape is also important since this affects how blocks interlock
together. In addition, armourstone must be able to withstand rapid and severe changes in
hydraulic pressure, alternate wetting and drying, thermal changes, wave and sand/gravel
impact and abrasion, as well as salt and solution damage. Consequently, the size, grading,
shape, density, water absorption, abrasion resistance, impact resistance, strength and dura-
bility of the rock material used for armourstone must be considered during the design stage
of a particular project. Hence, the selection of a suitable source of rock for armourstone
requires an inspection and evaluation of the quarry or quarries concerned, as well as an
assessment of the quality of the intact and processed stone (Latham, 1998). Moreover, the
thickness of the protective layer and the need for a granular filter or geotextile beneath it
depends on the design application, as well as the geotechnical and hydraulic conditions at
the site (Thorne et al., 1995).
290
Chapter 6
Usually, armourstone is specified by weight, a median weight of between 1 and 10 tonnes
normally being required (Latham et al., 2006). Blocks up to 20 tonnes, however, may be
required for breakwaters that will be subjected to large waves. The median weight of second-
ary armourstone and underlayer rock material may range upwards from 0.1 tonne. In the
case of rip-rap used for revetment and river bank protection, the weight of the blocks required
is usually less than 1.0 tonne and may grade down to 0.05 tonne. The size of blocks that can
be produced at a quarry depends on the incidence of discontinuities and, to a lesser extent,
on the method of extraction. Detailed discontinuity surveys can provide the data required for
prediction of in situ block size and shape.
The location of armourstone on a breakwater is an important factor that should be considered
when making an assessment of rock durability. Rock durability concerns its resistance to
chemical decay and mechanical disintegration, including reduction in size and change of
shape, during its working life. The intrinsic properties of a rock such as mineralogy, fabric,
grain size, grain interlock, porosity, and in the case of sedimentary rocks, the type and
amount of cementation, all affect its resistance to breakdown. In addition, the amount of
damage that armourstone undergoes is influenced by the action to which it is submitted.
For instance, the damage suffered by armourstone used on breakwaters depends on the
type of waves (plunging or breaking), their height, period and duration (notably during storm
conditions) on the one hand, and the slope and permeability of the structure on the other.
Abrasion due to wave action is the principal reason for the reduction in size of blocks of
armourstone used in breakwaters, as well as in rounding their shape.
Crushed Rock: Concrete Aggregate
Crushed rock is produced for a number of purposes, the chief of which are for concrete
and road aggregate. Approximately 75% of the volume of concrete consists of aggregate,
therefore its properties have a significant influence on the engineering behaviour of concrete.
Aggregate is divided into coarse and fine types, the former usually consisting of rock mate-
rial that is less than 40 mm and larger than 4 mm in size. The latter is obviously less than
4 mm. Fine types less than 75 mm should not exceed 10% by weight of the aggregate.
The amount of overburden that has to be removed is an important factor in quarrying opera-
tions, for if this increases and is not useable, then a time comes when quarrying operations
become uneconomic. The removal of weak overburden is usually undertaken by scrapers
and bulldozers, the material being disposed of in spoil dumps on site. Unfortunately, in the
case of weathered overburden, weathered profiles are frequently not a simple function of
depth below the surface and can be highly variable. Furthermore, in humid tropical areas, in
particular, weathered horizons may extend to appreciable depths. Consequently, assessment
of the amount of overburden that has to be removed can be complicated. Indurated overburden
291
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
may require drilling and blasting before being removed by dump trucks to the dump area.
Spoil is normally used to backfill worked out areas as part of the restoration programme.
High explosives such as gelegnite, dynamite or trimonite are used in drillholes when quarry-
ing crushed rocks. ANFO, a mixture of diesel oil and ammonium nitrate, is also used fre-
quently. The holes are drilled at an angle of about 10–20∞ from vertical for safety reasons,
and are usually located 3–6 m from the working face and a similar distance apart. Generally
one, but sometimes two, rows of holes are drilled. The explosive does not occupy the whole
length of a drillhole, lengths of explosive alternating with zones of stemming, which is com-
monly quarry dust or sand. Stemming occupies the top six or so metres of a drillhole. A single
detonation fires a cordex instantaneous fuse, which has been fed into each hole. It is
common practice to have millisecond delay intervals between firing individual holes, in this
way the explosions are complementary. The object of blasting is to produce a stone of work-
able size. Large stones must be further reduced by using a drop-ball or by secondary blast-
ing. The height of the face largely depends on the stability of the rock mass concerned. When
the height of a working face begins to exceed 20–30 m, it may be worked in tiers (Fig. 6.6).
After quarrying, the rock is fed into a crusher and then screened to separate the broken rock
material into different grade sizes.
Figure 6.6
Quarrying granite for aggregate, Hong Kong.
292
Chapter 6
The crushing strength of rock used for aggregate generally ranges between 70 and 300 MPa.
Aggregates that are physically unsound lead to the deterioration of concrete, inducing crack-
ing, popping or spalling. Cement shrinks on drying. If the aggregate is strong, the amount of
shrinkage is minimized and the cement–aggregate bond is good.
Hammersley (1989) noted that the petrography of a rock mass, involving field inspection, can
be of value in any assessment of its potential suitability for use as aggregate. In addition, pet-
rographic examination can indicate the presence of deleterious materials and defects.
The shape of aggregate particles is an important property and is governed mainly by the frac-
ture pattern within a rock mass. Rocks such as basalts, dolerites, andesites, granites,
quartzites and limestones tend to produce angular fragments when crushed. However,
argillaceous limestones, when crushed, produce an excessive amount of fines. The crushing
characteristics of sandstone depend on the closeness of its texture, and the amount and type
of cement. Angular fragments may produce a mix that is difficult to work, that is, it can be
placed less easily and offers less resistance to segregation. Nevertheless, angular particles
are said to produce a denser concrete. Rounded, smooth fragments produce workable
mixes. The less workable the mix, the more sand, water and cement must be added to pro-
duce a satisfactory concrete. Fissile rocks such as those that are strongly cleaved, schistose,
foliated or laminated have a tendency to split and, unless crushed to a fine size, give rise to
tabular- or planar-shaped particles. Planar and tabular fragments not only make concrete
more difficult to work, but they also pack poorly and so reduce its compressive strength and
bulk weight. Furthermore, they tend to lie horizontally in the cement, allowing water to collect
beneath them, which inhibits the development of a strong bond on their under surfaces.
The surface texture of aggregate particles largely determines the strength of the bond
between the cement and themselves. A rough surface creates a good bond, whereas a
smooth surface does not.
As concrete sets, hydration takes place, and alkalies (Na O and K O) are released. These
2 2
react with siliceous material such as opal, chalcedony, flint, chert and volcanic glass. If any
of these materials are used as aggregate in concrete made with high-alkali cement, then the
concrete is liable to expand and crack, thereby losing strength. Expansion due to alkali aggre-
gate reaction has also occurred when greywacke was used as aggregate. When concrete is
wet, the alkalies that are released are dissolved by its water content and, as the water is used
up during hydration, the alkalies are concentrated in the remaining liquid. This caustic solu-
tion attacks reactive aggregates to produce alkali–silica gels. The osmotic pressures devel-
oped by these gels as they absorb more water may eventually rupture the cement around
reacting aggregate particles. The gels gradually occupy the cracks thereby produced, and
they eventually extend to the surface of the concrete. If alkali reaction is severe, a polygonal
293
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
pattern of cracking develops on the surface. These troubles can be avoided if a preliminary
petrological examination is made of the aggregate. In other words, material that contains over
0.25% opal, over 5% chalcedony, or over 3% glass or cryptocrystalline acidic to intermediate
volcanic rock, by weight, will be sufficient to produce an alkali reaction in concrete, unless
low-alkali cement is used. This contains less than 0.6% of Na O and K O. If aggregate
2 2
contains reactive material surrounded by or mixed with inert matter, a deleterious reaction
may be avoided. The deleterious effect of alkali aggregate reaction can also be avoided if a
pozzolan is added to the mix, the reaction taking place between it and the alkalis.
Reactivity may be related not just to composition but also to the percentage of strained quartz
that a rock contains. For instance, Gogte (1973) maintained that rock aggregates containing
40% or more of strongly undulatory or highly granulated quartz were highly reactive, whereas
those with between 30 and 35% were moderately reactive. He also showed that basaltic
rocks with 5% or more secondary chalcedony or opal, or about 15% palagonite, showed dele-
terious reactions with high-alkali cements. Sandstones containing 5% or more chert behaved
in a similar manner.
Certain argillaceous dolostones have been found to expand when used as aggregates in
high-alkali cements, thereby causing failure in concrete. This phenomenon has been referred
to as alkali–carbonate rock reaction, and its explanation has been attempted by Gillott and
Swenson (1969). They proposed that the expansion of such argillaceous dolostones in
high-alkali cements was due to the uptake of moisture by the clay minerals. This was made
possible by dedolomitization that provided access for moisture. Moreover, they noted that
expansion only occurred when the dolomite crystals were less than 75 microns.
It usually is assumed that shrinkage in concrete should not exceed 0.045%, this taking place
in the cement. However, basalt, gabbro, dolerite, mudstone and greywacke have been shown
to be shrinkable, that is, they have large wetting and drying movements of their own, so much
so that they affect the total shrinkage of concrete. Clay and shale absorb water and are likely
to expand if they are incorporated in concrete, and they shrink on drying, causing injury to the
cement. Consequently, the proportion of clay material in a fine aggregate should not exceed
3%. Granite, limestone, quartzite and felsite are unaffected.
Road Aggregate
Aggregate constitutes the basic material for road construction and is quarried in the same
way as aggregate for concrete. Because it forms the greater part of a road surface, aggregate
has to bear the main stresses imposed by traffic, such as slow-crushing loads and rapid-impact
loads, and has to resist wear. Therefore, the rock material used should be fresh and have
high strength. In addition, the aggregate used in the wearing course should be able to resist
294
Chapter 6
the polishing action of traffic. The aggregate in blacktop should possess good adhesion
properties with bituminous binders.
Aggregate used as road metal must, in addition to having high strength, have high resistance
to impact and abrasion, polishing and skidding, and frost action. It must also be impermeable,
chemically inert and possess a low coefficient of expansion. The principal tests carried out in
order to assess the value of a roadstone are the aggregate crushing test, the aggregate
impact test, the aggregate abrasion test and the test for the assessment of the polished stone
value. Other tests of consequence are those for water absorption, specific gravity and
density, and the aggregate shape tests (Anon, 1975a). Some typical values of roadstone
properties of rocks are given in Table6.3.
The properties of an aggregate are related to the texture and mineralogical composition
of the rock from which it was derived. Most igneous and contact metamorphic rocks meet
the requirements demanded of good roadstone. On the other hand, many rocks of regional
metamorphic origin are either cleaved or schistose and are therefore unsuitable for
roadstone. This is because they tend to produce flaky particles when crushed. Such particles
do not achieve good interlock and, consequently, impair the development of dense mixtures
for surface dressing. The amount and type of cement and/or matrix material that bind grains
together in a sedimentary rock influence roadstone performance.
The way in which alteration develops can influence roadstone durability. Weathering may
reduce the bonding strength between grains to such an extent that they are plucked out
easily from the stone. Chemical alteration is not always detrimental to roadstone perform-
ance; indeed a small amount of alteration may improve the resistance of a rock to polishing
Table 6.3. Some representative values of the roadstone properties of some common
aggregates
Aggregate Aggregate Aggregate Polished
Water Specific crushing impact abrasion stone
Rock type absorption gravity value value value value
Basalt 0.9 2.91 14 13 14 58
Dolerite 0.4 2.95 10 9 6 55
Granite 0.8 2.64 17 20 15 56
Micro- 0.5 2.65 12 14 13 57
granite
Hornfels 0.5 2.81 13 11 4 59
Quartzite 1.8 2.63 20 18 15 63
Limestone 0.5 2.69 14 20 16 54
Greywacke 0.5 2.72 10 12 7 62
295
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
(see the following text). On the other hand, resistance to abrasion decreases progressively
with increasing content of altered minerals, as does the crushing strength. The combined
hardness of the minerals in a rock, together with any degree of fissility, as well as the texture
of the rock, also influence its rate of abrasion. The crushing strength is related to porosity and
grain size; the higher the porosity and the larger the grain size, the lower the crushing
strength.
One of the most important parameters of road aggregate is the polished stone value, which
influences skid resistance. A skid-resistant surface is one that is able to retain a high degree
of roughness while in service. At low speeds, the influence of the roadstone is predominant,
whereas at high speeds, the influence of surface tension on skidding mainly depends on
aggregate grading and the aggregate–binder relationship. The rate of polish is initially pro-
portional to the volume of the traffic. Straight stretches of road are less subject to polishing
than bends, which may polish up to seven times more rapidly. Stones are polished when fine
detrital powder is introduced between the tyre and surface. Investigations have shown that
detrital powder on a road surface tends to be coarser during wet than dry periods. This sug-
gests that polishing is more significant when the road surface is dry than wet, the coarser
detritus tending to roughen the surface of stone chippings. An improvement in skid resistance
can be brought about by blending aggregates. The skid resistance value of the blend
depends on the proportions of the individual materials composing the mix. Once placed in a
road surface, however, the proportions of each component in the blend that are exposed
influence the performance.
Rocks within the same major petrological group may differ appreciably in their polished stone
characteristics. In the case of igneous and contact metamorphic rocks, the principal petrographic
feature associated with good resistance to polish is a variation in hardness between the min-
erals present. In fact, the best resistance to polish occurs in rocks containing a proportion of
softer alteration materials. Coarser grain size and the presence of cracks in individual grains
also tend to improve resistance to polishing. In the case of sedimentary rocks, the presence
of hard grains set in a softer matrix produces a good resistance to polish. Sandstones,
greywackes and gritty limestones offer good resistance to polishing, but unfortunately not all
of them possess sufficient resistance to crushing and abrasion to render them useful in the
wearing course of a road. Purer limestones show a significant tendency to polish.
The petrology of an aggregate determines the nature of the surfaces to be coated, the
adhesion attainable depending on the affinity between the individual minerals and the binder,
as well as the surface texture of the individual aggregate particles. If the adhesion between
the aggregate and binder is less than the cohesion of the binder, stripping may occur.
Insufficient drying and the non-removal of dust before coating are, however, the principal
causes of stripping. Acid igneous rocks generally do not mix well with bitumen as they have
296
Chapter 6
a poor ability to absorb it. In contrast, basic igneous rocks such as basalt and dolerite
possess a high affinity for bitumen, as does limestone.
Igneous rocks are commonly used for roadstone. Dolerite and basalt have been used exten-
sively. They usually have a high strength and resist abrasion and impact, but their polished
stone value generally does not meet motorway specification in Britain, although it is suitable
for trunk roads. However, certain dolerites have proved to be susceptible to rapid weather-
ing, for instance, newly exposed fresh dolerite may show extensive signs of disintegration
within 18 months (Bell and Jermy, 2000). Swelling due to hydration of secondary montmoril-
lonite plays a part in the rapid breakdown of such dolerite. Rapid breakdown also has
occurred in basalts (Haskins and Bell, 1995). These slaking basalts also break down prima-
rily due to the absorption of moisture by secondary smectitic clays within the basalts. Felsite
and andesite are much sought after. The coarse-grained igneous rocks such as granite are
generally not as suitable as the fine-grained types, as they crush more easily. On the other
hand, the very-fine-grained and glassy volcanics are often unsuitable since they produce
chips with sharp edges when crushed, and they tend to develop a high polish.
Igneous rocks with a high silica content resist abrasion better than those in which the propor-
tion of ferromagnesian minerals is high, in other words, acid rocks such as rhyolites are harder
than basic rocks such as basalts. Some rocks that are the products of thermal metamor-
phism, such as hornfels and quartzite, because of their high strength and resistance to wear,
make good roadstones. In contrast, many rocks of regional metamorphic origin, because of
their cleavage and schistosity, are unsuitable. Coarse-grained gneisses offer a similar per-
formance to that of granites. Of the sedimentary rocks, limestone and greywacke frequently
are used as roadstone. Greywacke, in particular, has high strength, resists wear and devel-
ops a good skid resistance. Some quartz arenites are used, as are gravels. In fact, the use
of gravel aggregates is increasing.
Gravels and Sands
Gravel
Gravel deposits usually represent local accumulations, for example, channel fillings. In such
instances, they are restricted in width and thickness but may have considerable length.
Fan-shaped deposits of gravels or aprons may accumulate at the snouts of ice masses,
or blanket deposits may develop on transgressive beaches. The latter type of deposits are
usually thin and patchy, whereas the former are frequently wedge shaped.
A gravel deposit consists of a framework of pebbles between which are voids. The voids are
rarely empty, being occupied by sand, silt or clay material. River and fluvio-glacial gravels are
297
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
notably bimodal, the principal mode being in the gravel grade, the secondary in the sand
grade. Marine gravels, however, are often unimodal and tend to be more uniformly sorted
than fluvial types of similar grade size.
The shape and surface texture of the pebbles in a gravel deposit are influenced by the agent
responsible for its transportation and the length of time taken in transport, although shape is
also dependent on the initial shape of the fragment, which in turn is controlled by the fracture
pattern within the parental rock. Gravel particles can be classified as rounded, irregular,
angular, flaky and elongated in shape. Anon (1975a) defines a flakiness index, an elongation
index and an angularity number. The flakiness index of an aggregate is the percentage of
particles, by weight, whose least dimension (thickness) is less than 0.6 times their mean
dimension. The elongation index of an aggregate is the percentage, by weight, of particles
whose greatest dimension (length) is greater than 1.8 times their mean dimension. The angu-
larity number is a measure of relative angularity based on the percentage of voids in the
aggregate. The least angular aggregates are found to have about 33% voids, and the angu-
larity number is defined as the amount by which the percentage of voids exceeds 33. The
angularity number ranges from 0 to about 12. Anon (1975a) also recognized the following
types of surface texture, glassy, smooth, granular, rough, crystalline and honeycombed.
The composition of a gravel deposit reflects not only the type of rocks in the source area, but
is also influenced by the agents responsible for its formation and the climatic regime in which
it was or is being deposited. Furthermore, relief influences the character of a gravel deposit,
for example, under low relief, gravel production is small and the pebbles tend to be chemi-
cally inert residues such as vein quartz, quartzite, chert and flint. By contrast, high relief and
rapid erosion yield coarse, immature gravels. All the same, gravel achieves maturity much
more rapidly than does sand under the same conditions. Gravels that consist of only one type
of rock fragment are referred to as oligomictic. Such deposits are usually thin and well sorted.
Polymictic gravels usually consist of a varied assortment of rock fragments and occur as
thick, poorly sorted deposits.
Gravel particles generally possess surface coatings that may be the result of weathering or may
represent mineral precipitates derived from circulating groundwater. The latter type of coating may
be calcareous, ferruginous, siliceous or, occasionally, gypsiferous. Clay also may form a coating
about pebbles. Surface coatings generally reduce the value of gravels for use as concrete aggre-
gate, thick and/or soft and loosely adhering surface coatings are particularly suspect. Clay and
gypsum coatings, however, can often be removed by screening and washing. Siliceous coatings
tend to react with the alkalies in high-alkali cements and are, therefore, detrimental to concrete.
In a typical gravel pit, the material is dug from the face by a mechanical excavator. This loads
the material into trucks or onto a conveyor that transports it to the primary screening and
298
Chapter 6
crushing plant. After crushing, the material is further screened and washed. This sorts the
gravel into various grades and separates it from the sand fraction. The latter is usually sorted
into coarser and finer grades, the coarser is used for concrete and the finer is preferred
for mortar. Because gravel deposits are highly permeable, if the water table is high, then
the gravel pit will flood. The gravels then have to be worked by dredging. Sea-dredged
aggregates are becoming increasingly important.
Sand
The textural maturity of sand varies appreciably. A high degree of sorting, coupled with a high
degree of rounding, characterizes mature sand. The shape of sand grains, however, is not
greatly influenced by the length of transport. Maturity is reflected in the particle composition
of sand, and it has been argued that the ultimate sand is a concentration of pure quartz. This
is because the less-stable minerals disappear due to mechanical or chemical breakdown
during erosion and transportation or even after sand has been deposited.
Sands are used for building purposes to give bulk to concrete, mortars, plasters and
renderings. For example, sand is used in concrete to lessen the void space created by
the coarse aggregate. Sand consisting of a range of grade sizes gives a lower proportion
of voids than one in which the grains are of uniform size. Indeed, grading is probably the
most important property as far as the suitability of sand for concrete is concerned.
Anon (1992) recognizes four grades of sand that can produce good-quality concrete. In any
concrete mix, consideration should be given to the total specific surface of the coarse and
fine aggregates, since this represents the surface that has to be lubricated by the cement
paste to produce a workable mix. Poorly graded sands can be improved by adding the
missing grade sizes to them, so that high-quality material can be produced with correct
blending.
It is generally alleged that sand with rounded particles produces slightly more workable con-
crete than one consisting of irregularly shaped particles. Sands used for building purposes
are usually siliceous in composition and should be as free from impurities as possible. Ideally,
they should contain less than 3%, by weight, of silt or clay, since they need a high water con-
tent to produce a workable concrete mix. A high water content leads to shrinkage and crack-
ing in concrete on drying. Furthermore, clay and shaley material tend to retard setting and
hardening, or they may spoil the appearance of concrete. If sand particles are coated with
clay, they form a poor bond with cement and produce a weaker and less durable concrete.
The presence of feldspars in sands used in concrete has sometimes given rise to hair crack-
ing, and mica and particles of shale adversely affect the strength of concrete. Organic impu-
rities may affect the setting and hardening properties of cement adversely by retarding
hydration and, thereby, reduce its strength and durability. Organic and coaly material also
299
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
cause popping, pitting and blowing. If iron pyrite occurs in sand, then it gives rise to unsightly
rust stains when used in concrete. The salt content of marine sands is unlikely to produce
any serious adverse effects in good-quality concrete, although it probably will give rise to
efflorescence. Salt can be removed by washing sand.
High-grade quartz sands are used for making silica bricks used for refractory purposes.
Glass sands must have a silica content of over 95% (over 96% for plate glass). The amount
of iron oxides present in glass sands must be very low, under 0.05% in the case of clear
glass. Uniformity of grain size is another important property, as this means that the individual
grains melt in the furnace at approximately the same temperature.
Gravel and Sand Deposits
Scree material or talus accumulates along mountain slopes as a result of freeze–thaw action.
Talus is frequently composed of one rock type. The rock debris has a wide range of size
distribution, and the particles are angular. Because scree simply represents broken rock
material, it is suitable for use as aggregate, if the parent rock is suitable. Such scree deposits,
if large enough, only need crushing and screening and therefore are generally more
economical than the parent rock.
The composition of a river gravel deposit reflects the rocks of its drainage basin. Sorting takes
place with increasing length of river transportation, the coarsest deposits being deposited
first, although large fragments can be carried great distances during flood periods. Thus, river
deposits possess some degree of uniformity as far as sorting is concerned. Naturally, differ-
ences in gradation occur in different deposits within the same river channel but the gradation
requirements for aggregate are generally met with or they can be made satisfactory by a
small amount of processing. Moreover, as the length of river transportation increases, softer
material is progressively eliminated, although in a complicated river system with many
tributaries new sediment is being added constantly. Gravel deposits found in river beds are
usually characterized by rounded particles. River transportation also roughens the surfaces
of pebbles.
River terrace deposits are similar in character to those found in river channels. The pebbles
of terrace deposits may possess secondary coatings due to leaching and precipitation.
These are frequently of calcium carbonate that does not impair the value of the deposit,
but if they are siliceous, then this could react with alkalies in high-alkali cements and there-
fore could be detrimental to concrete. The longer the period of post-depositional weathering
to which a terrace deposit is subjected, the greater is the likelihood of its quality being
impaired.
300
Chapter 6
Alluvial cones are found along valleys located at the foot of mountains. They are poorly strat-
ified and contain rock debris with a predominantly angular shape and great variety in size.
Gravels and sands of marine origin are used increasingly as natural aggregates. The win-
nowing action of the sea leads to marine deposits being relatively clean and uniformly sorted.
For the latter reason, these deposits may require some blending. The particles are generally
well-rounded, with roughened surfaces. Gravels and sands that occur on beaches normally
contain deleterious salts and therefore require vigorous washing. By contrast, much of the
salt may have been leached out of the deposits found on raised beaches.
Wind-blown sands are uniformly sorted. They are composed predominantly of well-rounded
quartz grains that have frosted surfaces.
Glacial deposits are poorly graded, commonly containing an admixture of boulders and rock
flour. What is more, glacial deposits generally contain a wide variety of rock types, and the
individual rock fragments are normally subangular. The selective action of physical and
chemical breakdown processes is retarded when material is entombed in ice and therefore
glacial deposits often contain rock material that is unsuitable for use as aggregate. As a
consequence, glacial deposits are usually of limited value as far as aggregate is concerned.
By contrast, fluvio-glacial deposits are frequently worked for aggregate. These deposits were
laid down by melt waters that issued from or were associated with bodies of ice. They take
the form of eskers, kames and outwash fans (Fig. 3.30). The influence of water on these
sediments means that they have undergone a varying degree of sorting. They may be
composed of gravels or, more frequently, of sands. The latter are well sorted and may be
sharp, thus forming ideal building material.
Lime, Cement and Plaster
Lime is made by heating limestone, including chalk, to a temperature between 1100∞C and
1200∞C in a current of air, at which point carbon dioxide is driven off to produce quicklime
(CaO). Approximately 56 kg of lime can be obtained from 100 kg of pure limestone. Slaking
and hydration of quicklime take place when water is added, giving calcium hydroxide.
Carbonate rocks vary from place to place both in chemical composition and physical proper-
ties so that the lime produced in different districts varies somewhat in its behaviour.
Dolostones also produce lime; however, the resultant product slakes more slowly than does
that derived from limestones.
Portland cement is manufactured by burning pure limestone or chalk with suitable argilla-
ceous material (clay, mud or shale) in the proportion 3:1. The raw materials are crushed and
301
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
ground to a powder, and then blended. They are then fed into a rotary kiln and heated to a
temperature of over 1800∞C. Carbon dioxide and water vapour are driven off, and the lime
fuses with the aluminium silicate in the clay to form a clinker. This is ground to a fine powder,
and less than 3% gypsum is added to retard setting. Lime is the principal constituent of
Portland cement, but too much lime produces a weak cement. Silica constitutes approxi-
mately 20% and alumina 5%, both are responsible for the strength of the cement. A high con-
tent of the former, however, produces a slow setting, whereas a high content of the latter gives
a quick-setting cement. The percentage of iron oxides is low and, in white Portland cement,
it is kept to a minimum. The proportion of magnesia (MgO) should not exceed 4%, otherwise
the cement is unsound. Similarly, sulphate (SO ) must not exceed 2.75%. Sulphate-resisting
4
cement is made by the addition of a very small quantity of tricalcium aluminate to normal
Portland cement.
When gypsum (CaSO .nH O) is heated to a temperature of 170∞C, it loses three quarters of
4 2
its water of crystallization, becoming calcium sulphate hemi-hydrate, or plaster of Paris.
Anhydrous calcium sulphate forms at higher temperatures. These two substances are the chief
materials used in plasters. Gypsum plasters have now more or less replaced lime plasters.
Clays and Clay Products
The principal clay minerals belong to the kandite, illite, smectite, vermiculite and palygorskite
families. The kandites, of which kaolinite is the chief member, are the most abundant clay
minerals. Deposits of kaolin or china clay are associated with granite masses that have
undergone kaolinization. The soft china clay is excavated by strong jets of water under high
pressure, the material being washed to the base of the pit. This process helps separate the
lighter kaolin fraction from the quartz. The lighter material is pumped to the surface of the
quarry, where it is fed into a series of settling tanks. These separate mica, which is removed
for commercial use, from china clay. Washed china clay has a comparatively coarse size,
approximately 20% of the constituent particles being below 0.01 mm in size, accordingly the
material is non-plastic. Kaolin is used in the manufacture of white earthenware and
stoneware, in white Portland cement and for special refractories.
Ball clays are composed almost entirely of kaolinite and, as between 70 and 90% of the indi-
vidual particles are below 0.01 mm in size, these clays have a high plasticity. Their plasticity
at times is enhanced by the presence of montmorillonite. They contain a low percentage of
iron oxide and, consequently, give a light cream colour when burnt. They are used for the
manufacture of sanitary ware and refractories.
If a clay or shale can be used to manufacture refractory bricks, then it is termed a fireclay.
Such material should not fuse below 1600∞C and should be capable of taking a glaze.
302
Chapter 6
Ball clays and china clays are, in fact, fireclays, fusing at 1650 and 1750∞C, respectively,
however, they are too valuable except for making special refractories. Most fireclays are
highly plastic and contain kaolinite as their predominant material. Some of the best fireclays
are found beneath coal seams. Indeed, in the United Kingdom, fireclays are restricted almost
entirely to the strata of Coal Measures age. The material in a bed of fireclay that lies imme-
diately beneath a coal seam is often of better quality than that found at the base of the bed.
Since fireclays represent fossil soils that have undergone severe leaching, they consist
chiefly of silica and alumina, and contain only minor amounts of alkalies, lime and iron
compounds. This accounts for their refractoriness (alkalies, lime, magnesia and iron oxides
in a clay deposit tend to lower its temperature of fusion and act as fluxes). Very occasionally,
a deposit contains an excess of alumina and, in such cases, it possesses a very high refrac-
toriness. After the fireclay has been quarried or mined, it is usually left to weather for an
appreciable period of time to allow it to breakdown before it is crushed. The crushed fireclay
is mixed with water and moulded. Bricks, tiles and sanitary ware are made from fireclay.
Bentonite is formed by the alteration of volcanic ash, the principal clay mineral being either
montmorillonite or beidellite. When water is added to bentonite, it swells to many times its
original volume to produce a soft gel. Bentonite is markedly thixotropic and this, together with
its plastic properties, has given the clay a wide range of uses. For example, it is added
to poorly plastic clays to make them more workable and to cement mortars for the same
purpose. In the construction industry, it is used as a material for clay grouting, drilling mud,
slurry trenches and diaphragm walls.
Evaluation of Mudrocks for Brick Making
The suitability of a raw material for brick making is determined by its physical, chemical and
mineralogical character, and the changes that occur when it is fired. The unfired properties,
such as plasticity, workability (i.e. the ability of clay to be moulded into shape without fractur-
ing and to maintain its shape when the moulding action ceases), dry strength, dry shrinkage
and vitrification range, are dependent on the source material, but the fired properties such as
colour, strength, total shrinkage on firing, porosity, water absorption, bulk density and ten-
dency to bloat are controlled by the nature of the firing process. The ideal raw material should
possess moderate plasticity, good workability, high dry strength, total shrinkage on firing of
less than 10% and a long vitrification range.
The mineralogy of the raw material influences its behaviour during the brick-making process
and hence the properties of the finished product (Bell, 1992b). Mudrocks consist of clay
minerals and non-clay minerals, mainly quartz. The clay mineralogy varies from one deposit
to another. Although bricks can be made from most mudrocks, the varying proportions of
different clay minerals have a profound effect on the processing and on the character of the
303
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
fired brick. Those mudrocks that contain a single predominant clay mineral have a shorter
temperature interval between the onset of vitrification and complete fusion than those con-
sisting of a mixture of clay minerals. This is more true of montmorillonitic and illitic mudrocks
than those composed chiefly of kaolinite. Also, those clays that consist of a mixture of clay
minerals do not shrink as much when fired as those composed predominantly of one type of
clay mineral. Mudrocks containing significant amounts of disordered kaolinite tend to have
moderate to high plasticity and therefore are easily workable. They produce lean clay
materials that undergo little shrinkage during brick manufacture. They also possess a long
vitrification range and produce a fairly refractory product. However, mudrocks containing
appreciable quantities of well-ordered kaolinite are poorly plastic and less workable. Illitic
mudrocks are more plastic and less refractory than those in which disordered kaolinite is
dominant, and fire at somewhat lower temperatures. Smectites are the most plastic and least
refractory of the clay minerals. They show high shrinkage on drying since they require high
proportions of added water to make them workable. As far as the unfired properties of the
raw materials are concerned, the non-clay minerals present act mainly as a diluent, but they
may be of considerable importance in relation to the fired properties. The non-clay material
also may enhance the working properties, for instance, colloidal silica improves workability
by increasing the plasticity.
The presence of quartz in significant amounts gives strength and durability to a brick. This
is because, during the vitrification period, quartz combines with the basic oxides of the
fluxes released from the clay minerals on firing to form glass, which improves the
strength. However, as the proportion of quartz increases, the plasticity of the raw material
decreases.
The accessory minerals in mudrocks play a significant role in brick making. The presence
of carbonates is particularly important and can influence the character of the bricks produced.
When heated above 900∞C, carbonates break down, yielding carbon dioxide and leaving
behind reactive basic oxides, particularly those of calcium and magnesium. The escape
of carbon dioxide can cause lime popping or bursting if large pieces of carbonate, for exam-
ple, shell fragments, are present, thereby pitting the surface of a brick. To avoid lime popping,
the material must be ground finely to pass a 20-mesh sieve. The residual lime and magne-
sia form fluxes that give rise to low-viscosity silicate melts. The reaction lowers the temper-
ature of the brick during firing and hence, unless additional heat is supplied, lowers the
firing temperature and shortens the range over which vitrification occurs. The reduction in
temperature can result in inadequately fired bricks. If excess oxides remain in a brick, they
will hydrate on exposure to moisture, thereby adversely affecting the brick. The expulsion
of significant quantities of carbon dioxide can increase the porosity of bricks, reducing their
strength. Engineering bricks must be made from a raw material that has low carbonate
content.
304
Chapter 6
Sulphate minerals in mudrocks are detrimental to brick making. For instance, calcium sulphate
does not decompose within the range of firing temperature of bricks. It is soluble and, if
present in trace amounts in the finished brick, causes effluorescence when the brick is
exposed to the atmosphere. Soluble sulphates dissolve in the water used to mix the clay.
During drying and firing, they often form a white scum on the surface of a brick. Barium
carbonate may be added to render such salts insoluble and to prevent scumming.
Iron sulphides, such as pyrite and marcasite, frequently occur in mudrocks. When heated in
oxidizing conditions, the sulphides decompose to produce ferric oxide and sulphur dioxide.
In the presence of organic matter, oxidation is incomplete, yielding ferrous compounds that
combine with silica and basic oxides, if present, to form black glassy spots. This may lead
to a black vitreous core being present in some bricks that can significantly reduce strength.
If the vitrified material forms an envelope around the ferrous compounds and heating contin-
ues until this decomposes, then the gases liberated cannot escape, causing bricks to bloat
and distort. Under such circumstances, the rate of firing should be controlled in order to allow
gases to be liberated prior to the onset of vitrification. Too high a percentage of pyrite or other
iron-bearing minerals gives rise to rapid melting, which can lead to difficulties on firing.
Pyrite, and other iron-bearing minerals such as hematite and limonite, provide the iron that
primarily is responsible for the colour of bricks. The presence of other constituents, notably
calcium, magnesium or aluminium oxides, tends to reduce the colouring effect of iron oxide,
whereas the presence of titanium oxide enhances it. High original carbonate content tends to
produce yellow bricks.
Organic matter commonly occurs in mudrock. It may be concentrated in lenses or seams, or
be finely disseminated throughout the mudrock. Incomplete oxidation of the carbon upon
firing may result in black coring or bloating. Even minute amounts of carbonaceous material
can give black coring in dense bricks if it is not burned out. Black coring can be prevented by
ensuring that all carbonaceous material is burnt out below the vitrification temperature.
This means that if a raw material contains much carbonaceous material, it may be necessary
to admit cool air into the firing chamber to prevent the temperature from rising too quickly.
On the other hand, the presence of oily material in a clay deposit can be an advantage, for it
can reduce the fuel costs involved in brick making. For instance, the Lower Oxford Clay
in parts of England contains a significant proportion of oil, so that when heated above
approximately 300∞C, it becomes almost self-firing.
Mineralogical and chemical information is essential for determining the brick making charac-
teristics of a mudrock. Differential thermal analysis and thermogravimetric analysis can iden-
tify clay minerals in mudrocks, but provide only very general data on relative abundance.
X-ray diffraction methods are used to determine the relative proportions of clay and other
305
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
minerals present (Fig. 6.7a). The composition of the clay minerals present can also be
determined by plotting ignition loss against moisture absorption (Fig. 6.7b). The moisture
absorption characterizes the type of clay mineral present, whereas ignition loss provides
some indication of the quantity present.
Sufficient quantities of suitable raw material must be available at a site before a brick pit
can be developed. The volume of suitable mudrock must be determined as well as the
amount of waste, that is, the overburden and unsuitable material within the sequence that
Figure 6.7
(a) X-ray diffraction traces of a sample of Coal Measures shale used for brick making. Chl =chlorite; Mi =mica; K =kaolinite;
Q =quartz. (b) Clay mineral determination using Keeling’s method.
306
Chapter 6
is to be extracted (Bell, 1992b). The first stages of the investigation are topographical and
geological surveys, followed by a drillhole programme. This leads to a lithostratigraphic
and structural evaluation of the site. It also should provide data on the position of the
water table and the stability of the slopes that will be produced during excavation of the
brick pit.
Bricks
Mudrocks are dug from a brick pit by a variety of mechanical excavators, such as face shov-
els, draglines and continuous strippers (Fig. 6.8). The material is then stockpiled to allow
weathering to aid its breakdown. It is then crushed and sieved before being moulded, dried
and fired. There are four main methods of brick production in the United Kingdom, namely,
the wire-cut process, the semi-dry pressed method, the stiff plastic method and moulding by
hand or machine. One of the distinguishing factors between these methods is the moisture
content of the raw material when the brick is fashioned. This varies from as little as 10% in
the case of semi-dry pressed bricks to 25% or more in hand-moulded bricks. Hence, the nat-
ural moisture content of a mudrock can have a bearing on the type of brick-making operation.
Figure 6.8
Acontinuous stripper working the Lower Oxford Clay at Whittlesey, near Peterborough, England.
307
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
For example, many mudrocks have a natural moisture content in excess of 15% and there-
fore are unsuitable for the semi-dry pressed or even the stiff plastic methods of production
unless they are dried before moulding.
Three stages can be recognized in brick burning. During the water-smoking stage, which
takes place up to approximately 600∞C, water is given off. Pore water and the water with
which the clay was mixed are driven off at about 110∞C, whereas water of hydration disap-
pears between 400∞C and 600∞C. The next stage is that of oxidation, during which the
combustion of carbonaceous matter and the decomposition of iron pyrite takes place, and
carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and water vapour are given off. The final stage is that of
vitrification. Above 800∞C, the centre of the brick gradually develops into a highly viscous
mass, the fluidity of which increases as the temperature rises. The components are now
bonded together by the formation of glass. Bricks are fired at temperatures around 1000∞C
to 1100∞C for about 3 days. The degree of firing depends on the fluxing oxides, principally
H O, Na O, CaO and Fe O . Mica is one of the chief sources of alkalies in clay deposits.
2 2 2 3
Because illites are more intimately associated with micas than kaolinites, illitic clays usually
contain a higher proportion of fluxes and are therefore less refractory than kaolinitic clays.
The strength of the brick depends largely on the degree of vitrification. Theoretically, the
strength of bricks made from mudrocks containing fine-grained clay minerals such as illite
should be higher than those containing the coarser grained kaolinite. Illitic clays, however,
vitrify more easily, and there is a tendency to underfire, particularly if they contain fine-grained
calcite or dolomite. Kaolinitic clays are much more refractory and can stand harder firing,
greater vitrification is therefore achieved.
Permeability also depends on the degree of vitrification. Mudrocks containing a high propor-
tion of clay minerals produce less permeable products than clays with a high proportion of
quartz, but the former types of clays may have a high drying shrinkage.
The colour of a mudrock prior to burning gives no indication of the colour it will have after
leaving the kiln. The iron content of the raw material, however, is important in this respect.
For instance, as there is less scope for iron substitution in kaolinite than in illite, this often
means that kaolinitic clays give a whitish or pale yellow colour on firing, whereas illitic clays
generally produce red or brown bricks. More particularly, clay possessing about 1% of iron
oxides when burnt may produce a cream or light yellow colour, 2 to 3% gives buff, and 4 to
5% red. Other factors, however, must be taken into account. For instance, a clay containing
4% Fe O under oxidizing conditions burns pink below 800∞C, turns brick red at about
2 3
1000∞C and, at 1150∞C, as vitrification approaches completion, it adopts a deep red colour.
By contrast, under reducing conditions, ferrous silicate develops, and the clay product has a
blackish colour. Reducing conditions are produced if carbonaceous material is present in the
308
Chapter 6
clay, or they may be brought about by the addition of coal or sawdust to the clay before it is
burnt. Blue bricks are also produced under reducing conditions. The clay should contain
about 5% iron, together with lime and alkalies. An appreciable amount of lime in clay tends
to lighten the colour of the burnt product, for example, 10% of lime does not affect the colour
at 800∞C, but at higher temperatures, with the formation of calcium ferrites, a cream colour
is developed. This occurs in clays with 4% of Fe O or less. The presence of manganese in
2 3
clay may impart a purplish shade to the burned product.
309
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 7
Site Investigation
The general objective of a site investigation is to assess the suitability of a site for the
proposed purpose. As such, it involves exploring the ground conditions at and below
the surface (Anon, 1999). It is a prerequisite for the successful and economic design
of engineering structures and earthworks. Accordingly, a site investigation also should
attempt to foresee and provide against difficulties that may arise during construction because
of ground and/or other local conditions. Indeed, investigation should not cease once
construction begins. It is essential that the prediction of ground conditions that constitute the
basic design assumption be checked as construction proceeds and designs modified accord-
ingly if conditions are revealed to be different from those predicted. The investigation of a site
for an important structure requires exploration and sampling of strata likely to be significantly
affected by the structural load. Data appertaining to groundwater conditions, extent of weath-
ering, and discontinuity pattern in rock masses are also important. In some areas there are
special problems that need investigating, for example, potential subsidence in areas of
shallow abandoned mine workings and contaminated ground. What is more, as Culshaw
(2005) pointed out, the rapid development of information technology and the digitization of
increasing amounts of geological data now means that it often is possible to produce
three-dimensional (3D) special models of the shallow subsurface.
The complexity of a site investigation depends upon the nature of the ground conditions and
the type of engineering structure. More complicated ground conditions and sensitive large
engineering structures require more rigorous investigation of the ground conditions. Although
a site investigation usually consists of three stages, namely a desk study, a preliminary
reconnaissance and a site exploration, there must be a degree of flexibility in the procedure
since no two sites are the same.
Desk Study and Preliminary Reconnaissance
A desk study is undertaken as the first stage of a site investigation in order to make an initial
assessment of the ground conditions and to identify, if possible, any potential geotechnical
problems (Herbert et al., 1987). In other words, the objective of a desk study is to examine
available archival records, literature, maps, imagery and photographs relevant to the area or
311
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
site concerned to ascertain a general picture of the existing geological conditions prior to a
field investigation, that is, to begin the process of constructing what Fookes (1997) referred
to as the geological model. The effort expended in any desk study depends on the complex-
ity and size of the proposed project and on the nature of the ground conditions. Detailed
searches for information, however, can be extremely time consuming and may not be
justified for small schemes at sites where the ground conditions are relatively simple. In such
cases, a study of the relevant topographical and geological maps and memoirs, and possibly
aerial photographs, may suffice. On large projects, literature and map surveys may save time
and thereby reduce the cost of the site investigation programme. The data obtained during
such searches should help the planning of the subsequent site exploration and prevent
duplication of effort. In some parts of the world, however, little or no literature or maps are
available.
Topographical, geological and soil maps can provide valuable information that can be used
during the planning stage of a construction operation. The former are particularly valuable
when planning routeways. Geological maps afford a generalized picture of the geology of an
area. Generally, the stratum boundaries and positions of the structural features, especially
faults, are interpolated. As a consequence, their accuracy cannot always be trusted.
Map memoirs may accompany maps, and these provide a detailed survey of the geology of
the area in question.
From the engineer’s point of view, one of the shortcomings of conventional geological maps
is that the boundaries are stratigraphical and more than one type of rock may be included in
a single mappable unit. What is more, the geological map is lacking in quantitative informa-
tion that the engineer requires, concerning such facts as the physical properties of the rocks
and soils, the amount and degree of weathering, the hydrogeological conditions, etc. However,
information such as that relating to the distribution of superficial deposits, landslipped areas
and potential sources of construction materials frequently can be obtained from geological
maps. A geological map also can be used to indicate those rocks or soils that could be
potential sources of groundwater. Now many geological surveys are producing hazard maps,
environmental geology maps and engineering geology maps that provide data more relevant
to engineers and planners. Such maps represent an attempt to make geological information
more understandable by the non-geologist. Frequently, because it is impossible to represent
all environmental or engineering data on one map, a series of thematic maps, each of
a different topic, is incorporated into a report on a given area. Smith and Ellison (1999) have
provided a review of applied geological maps for planning and development. Their review
describes various ways by which geological data can be represented on maps.
A desk study for the planning stage of a project can encompass a range of appraisals from the
preliminary rapid response to the comprehensive. Nonetheless, there are a number of common
312
Chapter 7
factors throughout this spectrum that need to be taken into account.These are summarised in
Table 7.1, from which it can be concluded that an appraisal report typically includes a factual
and interpretative description of the surface and geological conditions, information on
previous site usage, a preliminary assessment of the suitability of the site for the planned
development, an identification of potential constraints and provisional recommendations with
regard to ground engineering aspects. A desk study also can reduce the risk of encountering
unexpected ground conditions that could adversely affect the financial viability of a project.
However, a desk study should not be regarded as an alternative to a ground exploration for
a construction project.
The preliminary reconnaissance involves a walk over the site. The factors that should be
taken into account depend on the nature of the site and the project but, where possible, note
can be taken of the distribution of the soil and rock types present, the relief of the ground, the
surface drainage and associated features, any actual or likely landslip areas, ground cover
and obstructions, earlier uses of the site such as tipping or evidence of underground
workings etc. The inspection should not be restricted to the site but should examine adjacent
areas to see how they affect or will be affected by construction on the site in question.
The importance of the preliminary investigation is that it should assess the suitability of the
site for the proposed works, and if it is suitable, it will form the basis upon which the site
exploration is planned. The preliminary reconnaissance also allows a check to be made on
any conclusions reached in the desk study.
Remote Sensing
Remote imagery and aerial photographs prove to be invaluable during the planning and
reconnaissance stages of certain projects. The information they provide can be transposed
to a base map, which is checked during fieldwork. The data also can be used in geographi-
cal information systems.
Remote sensing involves the identification and analysis of phenomena on the Earth’s surface
by using devices borne by aircraft or spacecraft. Most techniques used in remote sensing
depend on recording energy from part of the electromagnetic spectrum, ranging from gamma
rays through the visible spectrum to radio waves. The scanning equipment used measures
both emitted and reflected radiation, and the employment of suitable detectors and filters per-
mits the measurement of certain spectral bands. Two of the main systems of remote sensing
are infrared linescan (IRLS) and side-looking airborne radar (SLAR). Signals from several
bands of the spectrum can be recorded simultaneously by multi-spectral scanners. Lasers
are used in remote sensing.
313
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 7.1. Summary contents of engineering geological desk study appraisals (after Herbert
et al., 1987). With kind permission of the Geological Society
Item Content and main points of relevance
Introduction Statement of terms of reference and objectives, with indication of
any limitations. Brief description of nature of project and specific
ground-orientated proposals. Statement of sources of information
on which appraisal is based
Ground Description of relevant factual information. Identification of any
conditions major features that might influence scheme layout, planning or
feasibility
Site description Descriptions of existing surface conditions from study of
and topography topographic maps and actual photographs, and also from site
walkover inspection (if possible)
Engineering history Review of information on previous surface conditions and usage
(if different from present) based on study of old maps,
photographs, archival records and related to any present
features observed during site walkover. Identification of features
such as landfill zones, mine workings, pits and quarries, sources
of contamination,old water courses, etc.
Engineering Description of subsurface conditions, including any information on
geology groundwater, from study of geological maps and memoirs,
previous site investigation reports and any features or outcrops
observed during site walkover. Identification of possible geological
hazards, e.g. buried channels in alluvium, solution holes in chalk
and limestone, swelling/shrinkable clays
Provisional Summary of main engineering elements of proposed scheme, as
assessment understood. Comments on suitability of site for proposed
of site suitability development, based on existing knowledge
Provisional land Where there is significant variation in ground conditions or
classification assessed level of risk, subdivision of the site into zones of high and
low risk, and any intermediate zones. Comparison of various risk
zones with regard to the likely order of cost and scope of
subsequent site investigation requirements, engineering
implications, etc.
Provisional Statement of provisional engineering comments on such aspects
engineering as foundation conditions and which methods appears most
comments appropriate for structural foundations and ground slabs, road
pavement subgrade conditions, drainage, excavatability of
soils and rocks, suitability of local borrow materials for use
in construction, slope stability considerations, nature and
extent of any remedial works, temporary problems during
construction
Recommendations Proposals for phased ground investigation, with objectives,
for further work requirements and estimated budget costs
314
Chapter 7
Infrared linescanning is dependent upon the fact that all objects emit electromagnetic radia-
tion generated by the thermal activity of their component atoms. Identification of grey tones
is the most important aspect as far as the interpretation of thermal imagery is concerned,
since these provide an indication of the radiant temperatures of a surface. Warm areas give
rise to light, and cool areas to dark tones. The data can be processed in colour as well
as black and white, colours substituting for grey tones. Relatively cool areas are depicted as
purple and relatively warm areas as red on a positive print. Thermal inertia is important in this
respect since rocks with high thermal inertia, such as dolostone or quartzite, are relatively
cool during the day and warm at night. Rocks and soils with low thermal inertia, for example,
shale, gravel or sand, are warm during the day and cool at night. The variation in tempera-
ture of materials with high thermal inertia during the daily cycle is much less than those with
low thermal inertia. Because clay soils possess relatively high thermal inertia, they appear
warm in pre-dawn imagery, whereas sandy soils, because of their relatively low thermal
inertia, appear cool. The moisture content of a soil influences the image produced, that is,
soils that possess high moisture content appear cool irrespective of their type. Consequently,
high moisture content may mask differences in soil types. Fault zones often are picked out
because of their higher moisture content. Similarly, the presence of old landslides frequently
can be discerned because their moisture content differs from that of their surroundings.
Texture also can help interpretation. For instance, outcrops of rock may have a rough texture
due to the presence of bedding or jointing, whereas soils usually give rise to a relatively
smooth texture. However, where soil cover is less than 0.5 m, the rock structure usually is
observable on the imagery since deeper, more moist soil occupying discontinuities gives
a darker signature. Free-standing bodies of water usually are readily visible on thermal
imagery, however, the thermal inertia of highly saturated organic deposits may approach that
of water masses, the two therefore may prove difficult to distinguish at times.
In side-looking airborne radar, short pulses of energy, in a selected part of the radar wave-
band are transmitted sideways to the ground from antennae on both sides of an aircraft. The
pulses strike the ground and are reflected back to the aircraft. The reflected pulses are trans-
formed into black-and-white photographs. Mosaics of photographs are suitable for the iden-
tification of regional geological features and for preliminary identification of terrain units.
Lateral overlap of radar cover can give a stereoscopic image, which offers a more reliable
assessment of the terrain and can provide appreciable detail of landforms. The wavelengths
used in SLAR are not affected by cloud cover. This is particularly important in equatorial
regions, which are rarely free of cloud.
The large areas of the ground surface that satellite images can cover give a regional
physiographic setting and permit the distinction of various landforms. Accordingly, such
imagery can provide a geomorphological framework from which a study of the component
315
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
landforms is possible. The character of the landforms may afford some indication of the type
of material of which they are composed, and geomorphological data aid the selection of
favourable sites for investigation on larger-scale aerial surveys.
The value of space imagery is important where existing map coverage is inadequate.
For example, it can be of use for the preparation of maps of terrain classification, interpretation
of geological structure, geomorphological studies, regional engineering soil maps, maps used
for route selection, regional inventories of construction materials, groundwater studies, and
inventories of drainage networks and catchment areas (Sabins, 1996). A major construction
project is governed by the terrain. In order to assess the ground conditions, it is necessary to
make a detailed study of all the photo-pattern elements that comprise the landforms on the
satellite imagery. Important evidence relating to soil types, or surface or subsurface
conditions may be provided by erosion patterns, drainage characteristics or vegetative cover.
Engineering soil maps frequently are prepared on a regional basis for both planning and
location purposes in order to minimize construction costs, the soils being delineated for the
landforms within the regional physiographic setting.
Satellite imagery has improved in its resolution over time so that its use has extended from
regional geological mapping and mineral exploration to larger-scale geomorphological
mapping and geohazard identification. High-resolution airborne geophysical surveys
involving magnetic, gamma spectrometry and very-low-frequency electromagnetic sensors
are improving the ability to locate, for example, landfills with high ferrous contents, contami-
nated sites and abandoned mine sites. Such surveys provide rapid comprehensive data
coverage, which permits focused confirmatory ground coverage. This is advantageous when
investigating hazardous sites.
Later-generation LANDSAT satellites carry an improved imaging system called thematic
mapper (TM) as well as a multi-spectral scanner (MSS). Thermal mapper images have a
spatial resolution of 30 m and excellent spectral resolution. Generally, TM bands are
processed as normal and infrared colour images. Data gathered by Landsat TM are available
as CD-ROMS, which can be read and processed by computers. The weakest point in the
system is the lack of adequate stereovision capability, however, a stereomate of a TM image
can be produced with the help of a good digital elevation model.
Radar and laser sensors on airborne platforms are being used to produce high-resolution
(centimetre to metre) digital terrain models. The light detecting and ranging (LIDAR) system
sends a laser pulse from an airborne platform to the ground and measures the speed and
intensity of the returning signal. From this, changes in ground elevation can be mapped.
Radar systems use radars rather than lasers to achieve the same end. The satellite
technique known as permanent scatterer interferometry (PSInSAR) uses radar data collected
316
Chapter 7
by satellites 800 km out in space. The PSInSAR method exploits a dense network of “natu-
ral” reflectors that can be any hard surface such as a rock outcrop, a building wall or roof or
a road kerb. These reflectors are visible to the radar sensor over many years. Permanent
scatterer interferometry produces maps showing rates of displacement, accurate to a few
millimetres per year, over time periods, currently up to a decade long. The process provides
millimetric displacement histories for each reflector point across the entire time period
analysed, as calculated at every individual radar scene acquisition. Hence, small incremental
ground movements can be detected.
Aerial Photographs
The amount of useful information that can be obtained from aerial photographs varies with
the nature of the terrain and the type and quality of the photographs. A study of aerial
photographs allows the area concerned to be divided into topographical and geological units,
and enables the engineering geologist to plan fieldwork and to select locations for sampling.
This should result in a shorter, more profitable period in the field.
Aerial photographs are being digitized and distributed on CD-ROMS that are compatible with
desktop computers and image processing software. Orthophotographs are aerial
photographs that have been scanned into digital format and computer processed so that
radial distortion is removed. These photographs have a consistent scale and therefore may
be used in the same ways as maps.
Examination of consecutive pairs of aerial photographs with a stereoscope allows
observation of a 3D image of the ground surface. The 3D image means that heights can be
determined and contours can be drawn, thereby producing a topographic map. However, the
relief presented in this image is exaggerated, and therefore slopes appear steeper than they
actually are. Nonetheless, this helps the detection of minor changes in slope and elevation.
Unfortunately, exaggeration proves a definite disadvantage in mountainous areas, as it
becomes difficult to distinguish between steep and very steep slopes. A camera with a longer
focal lens reduces the amount of exaggeration, and therefore its use may prove preferable in
such areas. Digital photogrammetric methods use digital images and a computer instead of
a photogrammetric plotter to derive digital elevation models (DEMs) with the advantage that
various aspects of the measurement process can be automated (Chandler, 2001).
There are four main types of film used in normal aerial photography, namely black and white,
infrared monochrome, true colour and false colour. Black-and-white film is used for
topographic survey work and for normal interpretation purposes. The other types of film are
used for special purposes. For example, infrared monochrome film makes use of the fact that
317
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
near-infrared radiation is strongly absorbed by water. Accordingly, it is of particular value
when mapping shorelines, the depth of shallow underwater features and the presence of water
on land, as for instance, in channels, at shallow depths underground or beneath vegetation.
Furthermore, it is more able to penetrate haze than conventional photography. True colour
photography generally offers much more refined imagery. As a consequence, colour
photographs have an advantage over black and white ones as far as photogeological
interpretation is concerned. False colour is the term frequently used for infrared colour
photography. False colour provides a more sensitive means of identifying exposures of bare
grey rocks than any other type of film. Lineaments, variations in water content in soils and
rocks and changes in vegetation that may not be readily apparent on black-and-white
photographs often are clearly depicted by false colour. A summary of the types of geological
information that can be obtained from aerial photographs is given in Table 7.2.
Site Exploration – Direct Methods
The aim of a site exploration is to try to determine and thereby understand the nature of the
ground conditions on site and those of its surroundings (Clayton et al., 1996). The extent to
which this stage of a site investigation is carried depends, to some extent, upon the size and
importance of the construction operation. The site exploration must be concluded by a report
embodying the findings, which can be used for design purposes. This should contain
geological plans of the site with accompanying sections, thereby conveying a 3D picture of
the subsurface strata.
The scale of the mapping will depend on the engineering requirement, the complexity of the
geology, and the staff and time available. Rock and soil types should be mapped according
to their lithology and, if possible, presumed physical behaviour, that is, in terms of their
engineering classification, rather than age. Geomorphological conditions, hydrogeological
conditions, landslips, subsidences, borehole and field-test information all can be recorded on
geotechnical maps. Particular attention should be given to the nature of the superficial
deposits and, where present, made-over ground.
There are no given rules regarding the location of boreholes or drillholes, or the depth to which
they should be sunk. This depends upon the geological conditions and the type of project
concerned. The information provided by the desk study, the preliminary reconnaissance and
from any trial trenches should provide a basis for the initial planning and layout of the
borehole or drillhole programme. Holes should be located so as to detect the geological
sequence and structure. Obviously, the more complex this is, the greater the number of holes
needed. In some instances, it may be as well to start with a widely spaced network of holes.
As information is obtained, further holes can be put down if and where necessary.
318
Chapter 7
Table 7.2. Types of photogeological investigation
Structural Mapping and analysis of folding. Mapping of regional fault
geology systems and recording any evidence of recent fault movements.
Determination of the number and geometry of joint systems
Rock types Recognition of the main lithological types (crystalline and
sedimentary rocks, unconsolidated deposits)
Soil surveys Determining main soil type boundaries, relative permeabilities
and periglacial studies
Topography Determination of relief and landforms. Assessment of stability
of slopes, detection of old landslides
Stability Slope instability (especially useful in detecting old failures that
are difficult to appreciate on the ground) and rock fall areas,
quick clays, loess, peat, mobile sand, soft ground and features
associated with old mine workings
Drainage Outlining of catchment areas, steam divides, surface run-off
characteristics, areas of subsurface drainage such as karstic
areas, especially of cavernous limestone as illustrated by surface
solution features; areas liable to flooding. Tracing swampy ground,
perennial or intermittent streams, and dry valleys. Levees
and meander migration. Flood control studies. Forecasting
effect of proposed obstructions. Run-off characteristics.
Shoals, shallow water, stream gradients and widths
Erosion Areas of wind, sheet and gully erosion, excessive deforestation,
stripping for opencast work, coastal erosion
Groundwater Outcrops and structure of aquifers. Water bearing sands and
gravels. Seepages and springs, possible productive fracture
zones. Sources of pollution. Possible recharge sites
Reservoirs and Geology of reservoir site, including surface permeability
dam sites classification. Likely seepage problems. Limit of flooding and
rough relative values of land to be submerged. Bedrock gullies,
faults and local fracture pattern. Abutment characteristics.
Possible diversion routes. Ground needing clearing. Suitable
areas for irrigation
Materials Location of sand and gravel, clay, rip-rap, borrow and quarry sites
with access routes
Routes Avoidance of major obstacles and expensive land. Best graded
alternatives and ground conditions. Sites for bridges. Pipe and
power line reconnaissance. Best routes through urban areas
Old mine workings Detection of shafts and shallow abandoned workings, subsidence features
Exploration should be carried out to a depth that includes all strata likely to be significantly
affected by structural loading. As far as soils are concerned, experience has shown that
damaging settlement usually does not take place when the added stress in the soil due to the
weight of a structure is less is less than 10% of the effective overburden stress. It therefore
would seem logical to sink boreholes on compact sites to depths where the additional stress
does not exceed 10% of the stress due to the weight of the overlying strata. It must be borne
319
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in mind that if a number of loaded areas are in close proximity the effect of each is additive. Under
certain special conditions, holes may have to be sunk more deeply as, for example, when voids
due to abandoned mining operations are suspected or when it is suspected that there are highly
compressible layers, such as interbedded peats, at depth. If possible, boreholes should be taken
through superficial deposits to rockhead. In such instances, adequate penetration of the rock
should be specified to ensure that isolated boulders are not mistaken for the solid formation.
The results from a borehole or drillhole should be documented on a log (Fig. 7.1). Apart from the
basic information such as number, location, elevation, date, client, contractor and engineer
responsible, the fundamental requirement of a borehole log is to show how the sequence of
strata changes with depth. Individual soil or rock types are presented in symbolic form on a log.
The material recovered must be described adequately, and in the case of rocks frequently
include an assessment of the degree of weathering, fracture index and relative strength. The type
of boring or drilling equipment should be recorded, the rate of progress made being a significant
factor. The water level in the hole and any water loss, when it is used as a flush during rotary
drilling, should be noted, as these reflect the mass permeability of the ground. If any in situ
testing is done during boring or drilling operations, then the type(s) of test and the depth at which
it/they were carried out must be recorded. The depths from which samples are taken must be
noted. A detailed account of the logging of cores for engineering purposes is provided by Anon
(1970). Description and classification of soils, and of rocks and rock masses, can be found in
Anon (1999), while a description and classification of weathered rocks is given in Anon (1995)
and of discontinuities in Barton (1978).
Direct observation of strata down a hole, of discontinuities and cavities can be undertaken by
cameras or closed-circuit television equipment, and drillholes can be viewed either radially
or axially. The camera can be used in boreholes or drillholes down to a minimum diameter of
100 mm. Remote focusing for all heads and rotation of the radial head through 360∞are
controlled from the surface. The television heads have their own light source. Focussing, light
intensity, rotation and digital depth control on the image are made by means of a surface
control unit and the image is recorded on standard VHS format video tape. Colour changes
in rocks can be detected as a result of the varying amount of light reflected from the drillhole
walls. Discontinuities appear as dark areas because of the non-reflection of light. However,
if the drillhole is deflected from the vertical, variations in the distribution of light may result in
some lack of picture definition.
Subsurface Exploration in Soils
The simplest method whereby data relating to subsurface conditions in soils can be
obtained is by hand augering. Soil samples that are obtained by augering are badly disturbed
320
Chapter 7
Figure 7.1
Drillhole log. With kind permission of the Geological Society.
321
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
and invariably some amount of mixing of soil types occurs. Critical changes in ground condi-
tions therefore are unlikely to be located accurately. Even in very soft soils it may be very
difficult to penetrate more than 7 m with hand augers.
Power augers are available as solid stem or hollow stem both having an external continuous
helical flight. The later are used in those soils in which the borehole does not remain open.
The hollow stem can be sealed at the lower end with a combined plug and cutting bit that is
removed when a sample is required. Hollow-stem augers are useful for investigations where
the requirement is to locate bedrock beneath overburden. Solid-stem augers are used in stiff
clays that do not need casing, however, if an undisturbed sample is required, then they have
to be removed. Disturbed samples taken from auger holes often are unreliable. In favourable
ground conditions, such as firm and stiff homogeneous clays, auger rigs are capable of high
output rates. The development of large earth augers and patent piling systems have made it
is possible to sink 1 m diameter boreholes in soils more economically than previously.
The ground conditions can be inspected directly from such holes. Depending on the ground
conditions, the boreholes may be unlined, lined with steel mesh or cased with steel pipe.
In the latter case, windows are provided at certain levels for inspection and sampling.
Pits and trenches allow the ground conditions in soils and highly weathered rocks to be
examined directly, although they are limited as far as their depth is concerned. Trenches can
provide a flexible, rapid and economic method of obtaining information. Groundwater
conditions and stability of the sides obviously influence whether or not they can be excavated,
and safety must at all times be observed, necessitating shoring the sides. Pits are expensive
and should be considered only if the initial subsurface survey has revealed any areas of
special difficulty. The soil conditions in pits and trenches can be mapped or photographed
throughout. Undisturbed, as well as disturbed, samples can be collected where necessary.
The light cable and tool boring rig is used for investigating soils (Fig. 7.2). The hole is sunk
by repeatedly dropping one of the tools into the ground. A power winch is used to lift the tool,
suspended on a cable, and by releasing the clutch of the winch the tool drops and cuts into
the soil. Once a hole is established, it is lined with casing, the drop tool operating within the
casing. This type of rig usually is capable of penetrating about 60 m of soil, and in doing so
the size of the casing in the lower end of the borehole is reduced. The basic tools are the
shell and the clay cutter, which are essentially open-ended steel tubes to which cutting shoes
are attached. The shell, which is used in granular soils, carries a flap valve at its lower end,
which prevents the material from falling out on withdrawal from the borehole. The material is
retained in the cutter by the adhesion of the clay.
For boring in stiff clays the weight of the clay cutter may be increased by adding a sinker bar.
In very stiff clays, a little water often is added to assist boring progress. This must be done
322
Chapter 7
Figure 7.2
Light cable and tool percussion boring rig.
with caution so as to avoid possible changes in the properties of any soil about to be
sampled. Furthermore, in such clays, the borehole often can be advanced without lining,
except for a short length at the top to keep the hole stable. If cobbles or small boulders are
encountered in clays, particularly tills, then these can be broken by using heavy chisels.
When boring in soft clays, although the hole may not collapse, it tends to squeeze inwards
and to prevent the cutter operating; the hole therefore must be lined. The casing is driven in
and winched out, however, in difficult conditions it may have to be jacked out. Casing tubes
have internal diameters of 150, 200, 250 and 300 mm, the most commonly used sizes being
150 and 200 mm (the large sizes are used in coarse gravels).
The usual practice is to bore ahead of the casing for about 1.5 m (the standard length of a
casing section) before adding a new section of casing and surging it down. The reason for
surging the casing is to keep it “free” in the borehole so that it can be extracted more easily
323
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
on completion. When the casing can no longer be advanced by surging, smaller diameter
casing is introduced. If the hole is near its allotted depth the casing may be driven into the
ground for quickness. Where clay occurs below coarse deposits, the casing used as a
support in the coarse soils is driven a short distance into the clay to create a seal and the
shell is used to remove any water that might enter the borehole.
Boreholes in sands or gravels almost invariably require lining. The casing should be
advanced with the hole or overshelling is likely to occur, that is, the sides collapse and prevent
further progress. Because of the mode of operation of the shell, the borehole should be kept
full of water so that the shell may operate efficiently. Where coarse soils are water-bearing,
all that is necessary is for the water in the borehole to be kept topped up. If flow of water
occurs, then it should be from the borehole to the surrounding soil. However, if water is
allowed to flow into the borehole, piping probably will occur. Piping usually can be avoided
by keeping the head of water in the borehole above the natural head. To overcome artesian
conditions, the casing should be extended above ground and kept filled with water. The shell
generally cannot be used in highly permeable coarse gravels since it usually is impossible to
maintain a head of water in the borehole. Fortunately, these conditions often occur at or near
ground level, and the problem can sometimes be overcome by using an excavator to open a
pit either to the water table or to a depth of 3 to 4 m. Casing can then be put in place, the pit
backfilled and boring then can proceed. Another method of penetrating gravels and cobbles
above the water table is to employ a special grab with a heavy tripod and winch and casing
of 400 mm diameter or greater.
Rotary attachments are available that can be used with light cable and tool rigs. However,
they are much less powerful than normal rotary rigs and tend to be used only for short runs
as, for example, to prove rockhead at the base of a borehole.
In the wash boring method, the hole is advanced by a combination of chopping and jetting
the soil or weak or weathered rock, the cuttings thereby produced being washed from the
hole by the water used for jetting (Fig. 7.3). The method cannot be used for sampling, and
therefore its primary purpose is to sink the hole between sampling positions. When a sample
is required, the bit is replaced by a sampler. Nevertheless, some indication of the type of
ground penetrated may be obtained from the cuttings carried to the surface by the wash
water, from the rate of progress made by the bit or from the colour of the wash water. Several
types of chopping bits are used. Straight and chisel bits are used in sands, silts, clays and
very soft rocks, while cross bits are used in gravels and soft rocks. Bits are available with
either the jetting points facing upwards or downwards. The former types are better at
cleaning the base of the hole than are the latter. The wash boring method may be used in
both cased and uncased holes. Casing obviously has to be used in coarse soils to avoid
the sides of the hole from collapsing. Although this method of boring commonly is used in the
324
Chapter 7
Figure 7.3
Wash-boring rig. (a) Driving the casing, (b) Advancing the hole.
United States, it rarely has been employed in Britain. This is mainly because wash boring
does not lend itself to many of the ground conditions encountered and also to the difficulty of
identifying strata with certainty.
Sampling in Soils
As far as soils are concerned, samples may be divided into two types, disturbed and
undisturbed. Disturbed samples can be obtained by hand, by auger or from the clay cutter or
shell of a boring rig. Samples of fine soils should be approximately 0.5 kg in weight,
providing a sufficient size for index testing. The samples are sealed in jars. A larger sample
is necessary if the particle size distribution of coarse soil is required, and this may be
retained in a tough plastic sack. Care must be exercised when obtaining such samples to
avoid loss of fines.
An undisturbed sample can be regarded as one that is removed from its natural condition
without disturbing its structure, density, porosity, moisture content and stress condition.
Although it must be admitted that no sample is ever totally undisturbed, every attempt must
be made to preserve the original condition of such samples. Unfortunately, mechanical
disturbances produced when a sampler is driven into the ground distort the soil structure.
Furthermore, a change of stress condition occurs when a borehole is excavated.
325
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Undisturbed samples may be obtained by hand from surface exposures, pits and trenches.
Careful hand trimming is used to produce a regular block, normally a cube of about 250 mm
dimensions. Block samples are covered with muslin and sealed with wax. Such samples are
particularly useful when it is necessary to test specific horizons, such as shear zones.
As far as any undisturbed sampling tool is concerned, its fundamental requirement is that on
being forced into the ground it should cause as little remoulding and displacement of the soil
as possible. The amount of displacement is influenced by a number of factors. Firstly, there
is the cutting shoe or edge of the sampler. A thin cutting shoe and sampling tube minimize
displacement but they can be damaged easily, and they cannot be used in gravels and hard
soils. Secondly, the internal diameter of the cutting shoe, D, should be slightly less than that
i
of the sample tube, thereby providing inside clearance that reduces drag effects due to
friction. Thirdly, the outside diameter of the cutting shoe, D , should be from 1 to 3% larger
o
than that of the sampler, again to allow for clearance. The relative displacement of a sampler
can be expressed by the area ratio, A:
r
D2- D2
A = i O¥ 100 (7.1)
r D2
O
This ratio should be kept as low as possible, for example, displacement is minimized by keeping
the area ratio below 15%. It should not exceed 25% (Hvorslev, 1949). Fourthly, friction also
can be reduced if the tube has a smooth inner wall. A coating of light oil also may prove useful
in this respect.
The standard sampling tube for obtaining samples from cohesive soils is referred to as the
U100, having a diameter of 100 mm, a length of approximately 450 mm and walls 1.2 mm
thick (Fig. 7.4). The cutting shoe should meet the requirements noted above. The upper
end of the tube is fastened to a check valve that allows air or water to escape during driving
and helps to hold the sample in place when it is being withdrawn. On withdrawal from the bore-
hole, the sample is sealed in the tube with paraffin wax and the end caps screwed on. In soft
materials, two or three tubes may be screwed together to reduce disturbance of the sample.
The standard type of sampler is suitable for clays with a shear strength exceeding 50 kPa.
However, a thin-walled piston sampler should be used for obtaining clays with lower shear
strength since soft clays tend to expand into the sample tube. Expansion is reduced by a
piston in the sampler, the thin-walled tube being jacked down over a stationary internal
piston, which, when sampling is complete, is locked in place and the whole assembly then is
pulled (Fig. 7.5). Piston samplers range in diameter from 54 to 250 mm. A vacuum tends to
be created between the piston and the soil sample, which thereby helps to hold it in place.
326
Chapter 7
Figure 7.4
The general-purpose open-tube sampler, U100.
When continuous samples are required, particularly from rapidly varying or sensitive soils, a
Delft sampler may be used (Fig. 7.6). This can obtain a continuous sample from ground level
to depths of about 20 m. The core is retained in a self-vulcanising sleeve as the sampler is
continuously advanced into the soil.
Sub-surface Exploration in Rocks and Sampling
Rotary drills are either skid-mounted, trailer mounted or, in the case of larger types, mounted
on lorries (Fig. 7.7). They are used for drilling through rock, although they can penetrate and
take samples from soil.
Rotary percussion drills are designed for rapid drilling in rock (Fig. 7.8). The rock is subjected
to rapid high-speed impacts while the bit rotates, which brings about compression and shear
327
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.5
Piston sampler of hydraulically operated type. (a) Lowered to bottom of borehole, boring rod clamped in fixed position at the
ground surface, (b) Sampling tube after being forced into the soil through water supplied through boring rod.
in the rock. Full-face bits, which produce an open hole, are used. These are usually of
the studded, cruciform or tricone roller bit type (Fig. 7.9). The technique is most effective in brit-
tle materials since it relies on chipping the rock. The rate at which drilling proceeds depends upon
the type of rock, particularly on its strength, hardness and fracture index; the type of drill and drill
bit; the flushing medium and the pressures used; as well as the experience of the drilling crew.
Compressed air, water or mud may be used as the flush. If the drilling operation is standardized,
328
Chapter 7
Figure 7.6
Section through a 66-mm continuous sampling apparatus. (a) Outer tube, (b) stocking tube over which pre-coatednylon stocking
is slid, (c) plastic inner tube, (d) cap at top of sample, (e) steel wire to fixed point at the ground surface (tension cable),
(f) sample-retaining clamps, (g) cutting shoe, (h) holes for entry of lubricating fluid.
then differences in the rate of penetration reflect differences in rock types. Drill flushings should
be sampled at regular intervals, at changes in the physical appearance of the flushings and at
significant changes in penetration rates. Interpretation of rotary percussion drillholes should be
related to a cored drillhole near by. Rotary percussion drilling sometimes is used as a means of
advancing a hole at low cost and high speed between intervals where core drilling is required.
For many engineering purposes, a solid, and as near as possible continuous rock core, is
required for examination. The core is cut with a bit and housed in a core barrel (Fig. 7.10).
The bit is set with diamonds or tungsten carbide inserts. In set bits, diamonds are set on the
face of the matrix. The coarser surface set diamond and tungsten carbide tipped bits are
used in softer formations. These bits generally are used with air rather than with water flush.
Impregnated bits possess a matrix impregnated with diamond dust, and their grinding action
329
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.7
Medium-size, skid-mounted rotary drill.
is suitable for hard and broken formations. In fact, most core drilling is carried out using dia-
mond bits, the type of bit used being governed by the rock type to be drilled. In other words,
the harder the rock, the smaller the size and the higher the quality of the diamonds that are
required in the bit. Tungsten bits are not suitable for drilling in very hard rocks. Thick-walled
bits are more robust but penetrate more slowly than thin-walled bits. The latter produce a
larger core for a given hole size. This is important where several reductions in size have to
be made. Core bits vary in size, and accordingly core sticks range between 17.5 and 165 mm
diameter. Other factors apart, generally the larger the bit, the better is the core recovery.
A variety of core barrels is available for rock sampling. The simplest type of core barrel is the
single tube, but because it is suitable only for hard massive rocks, it rarely is used. In the
single-tube barrel, the barrel rotates the bit and the flush washes over the core. In double-
tube barrels, the flush passes between the inner and outer tubes. Double tubes may be of
the rigid or swivel type. The disadvantage of the rigid barrel is that both the inner and outer
tubes rotate together, and in soft rock this can break the core as it enters the inner tube.
330
Chapter 7
Figure 7.8
Rotary percussion drilling rig.
It therefore is only suitable for hard rock formations. In the double-tube swivel-core barrel, the outer
tube rotates while the inner tube remains stationary (Fig. 7.11). It is suitable for use in medium and
hard rocks, and gives improved core recovery in soft friable rocks. The face-ejectionbarrel is a
variety of the double-tube swivel-type in which the flushing fluid does not affect the end of the
core. This type of barrel is a minimum requirement for coring badly shattered, weathered and
soft rock formations. Triple-tube barrels are used for obtaining cores from very soft rocks and
b
a
Figure 7.9
Full-face bits for rotary percussion, (a) cross-chisel or cruciform bit, (b) studded bit.
331
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.10
Some common types of coring bits, (a) surface-set diamond bit (bottom discharge), (b) stepped saw-tooth bit, (c) tungsten
carbide bit, (d) impregnated diamond bit.
from highly jointed and cleaved rocks. This type of core barrel has an inner triple tube that is
split into two halves longitudinally. Hence, when withdrawn from the outer casing of the core
barrel the core can be observed and described without the risk of disturbance.
Both the bit and core barrel are attached by rods to the drill by which they are rotated. Either
water or air is used as a flush. This is pumped through the drill rods and discharged at the
bit. The flushing agent serves to cool the bit and to remove the cuttings from the drillhole.
Bentonite is sometimes added to the water flush. It eases the running and pulling of
casing by lubrication, it holds chippings in suspension and promotes drillhole stability by
increasing flush returns through the formation of a filter skin on the walls of the hole.
Disturbance of the core is likely to occur when it is removed from the core barrel. Most
rock cores should be removed by hydraulic extruders while the tube is held horizontal.
To reduce disturbance during extrusion the inner tube of double-core barrels can be lined
with a plastic sleeve before drilling commences. On completion of the core run, the plastic
sleeve containingthe core is withdrawn from the barrel.
332
Chapter 7
Figure 7.11
Double-tube swivel-type core barrel.
If casing is used for drilling operations, then it is drilled into the ground using a tungsten-
carbide- or diamond-tipped casing shoe with air, water or mud flush. The casing may be
inserted down a hole drilled to a larger diameter to act as conductor casing when reducing
and drilling ahead in a smaller diameter, or it may be drilled or reamed in a larger diame-
ter than the initial hole to allow continued drilling in the same diameter.
Many machines will core drill at any angle between vertical and horizontal. Unfortunately,
inclined drillholes tend to go off line, the problem being magnified in highly jointed formations.
In deeper drilling, the sag of the rods causes the hole to deviate. Drillhole deviation can be
measured by an inclinometer.
The weakest strata generally are of the greatest interest, but these are the materials that are
most difficult to obtain and most likely to deteriorate after extraction. Shales and mudstones
are particularly prone to deterioration, and some may disintegrate completely if allowed to
dry. Deterioration of suspect rock may be reduced by wrapping core material with aluminium
foil or plastic sheeting. Core material may be photographed before it is removed from site.
Zones of core loss or no recovery must be recorded as these could represent problem zones.
Hawkins (1986) introduced the concept of lithology quality designation, LQD, which he
defined as the percentage of solid core present greater than 100 mm in length within any
lithological unit. He also recommended that the total core recovery, TCR, and the maximum
intact core length, MICL, should be recorded.
A simple but nonetheless important factor is labelling of core material. This must record the
site, the drillhole number and the position in the drillhole from which material was obtained.
The labels themselves must be durable and properly secured. When rock samples are stored
333
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in a core box, the depth of the top and bottom of the core contained and of the separate core
runs should be noted both outside and inside the box. Zones of core loss should be identified.
In Situ Testing
There are two categories of penetrometer tests, the dynamic and the static. Both methods
measure the resistance to penetration of a conical point offered by the soil at any particular
depth. Penetration of the cone creates a complex shear failure and thus provides an indirect
measure of the in situ shear strength of the soil.
The most widely used dynamic method is the standard penetration test. This empirical test,
which was designed initially for use in sands, consists of driving a split-spoon sampler, with an
outside diameter of 50 mm, into the soil at the base of a borehole. If the test is carried out in
gravelly soils, then the cutting shoe is replaced by a 60∞c one. Drivage is accomplished by a
trip hammer, weighing 65 kg, falling freely through a distance of 760 mm onto the drive head,
which is fitted at the top of the rods (Fig. 7.12). First, the split-spoon is driven 150 mm into the
soil at the bottom of the borehole. It then is driven a further 300 mm, and the number of blows
required to drive this distance is recorded. The blow count is referred to as the N value from
which the relative density of coarse soil can be assessed (Table 7.3). Refusal is regarded as
50 blows. In deep boreholes, the standard penetration test suffers the disadvantage that the
load is applied at the top of the rods so that some of the energy from the blow is dissipated in
the rods. Hence, with increasing depth the test results become more suspect.
The results obtained from the standard penetration test provide an evaluation of the degree of
compaction of sands, and the Nvalues may be related to the values of the angle of internal
friction, f, and the allowable bearing capacity. The lowest values of the angle of internal fric-
tion given in Table 7.3 are conservative estimates for uniform clean sand, and they should be
reduced by at least 5∞for clayey sand. The upper values apply to well graded sand and may
be increased by 5∞for gravelly sand. Terzaghi and Peck (1968) suggested that the relative
density for very fine or silty submerged sand with a standard penetration value N’ greater than
15 would be nearly equal to that of a dry sand with a standard penetration value, N, where:
N=15+1 (N¢ - 15) (7.2)
2
If this correction was not made, Terzaghi and Peck suggested that the relative density of
even moderately dense very fine or silty submerged sand might be overestimated by the
results of standard penetration tests. In gravel deposits, care must be taken to determine
whether a large gravel size may have influenced the results. Usually, in the case of
334
Chapter 7
Figure 7.12
Standard penetration test equipment, (a) split spoon sampler with shoe or cone end caps, (B) trip hammer.
gravel, only the lowest values of Nare taken into account. The standard penetration test
also can be employed in stiff clays, weak rocks and in the weathered zones of harder
rocks (Table 7.3).
The most widely used static method employs the Dutch cone penetrometer (Fig. 7.13). It is
particularly useful in soft clays and loose sands, where boring operations tend to disturb
in situ values. In this technique, a tube and inner rod with a conical point at the base are
hydraulically advanced into the ground, the reaction being obtained from pickets screwed into
the ground. The cone has a cross-sectional area of 1000 mm2 with an angle of 60∞.
At approximately every 300 mm depth, the cone is advanced ahead of the tube a distance of
50 mm and the maximum resistance noted. The tube then is advanced to join the cone after
each measurement and the process repeated. The resistances are plotted against their
corresponding depths so as to give a profile of the variation in consistency (Fig. 7.14).
One type of Dutch cone penetrometer has a sleeve behind the cone that can measure side
friction. The ratio of sleeve resistance to that of cone resistance is higher in fine than in
coarse soils, thus affording a tentative estimate of the type of soil involved.
335
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 7.3. Relative density and consistency of soil
(a) Relative density of sand and SPT values, and relationship to angle of friction
Description of Angle of internal
SPT(N) Relative density (D) compactness friction (j )
r
4 0.2 Very loose Under 30∞
4–10 0.2–0.4 Loose 30–35∞
10–30 0.4–0.6 Medium dense 35–40∞
30–50 0.6–0.8 Dense 40–45∞
Over 50 0.8–1.0 Very dense Over 45∞
(b) N values, consistency and unconfined compressive strength of cohesive soils
Unconfined compressive
N Consistency strength (kPa)
Under 2 Very soft Under 20
2–4 Soft 20–40
5–8 Firm 40–75
9–15 Stiff 75–150
16–30 Very stiff 150–300
Over 30 Hard Over 300
In the piezocone, a cone penetrometer is combined with a piezometer, the latter being
located between the cone and the friction sleeve. The pore water pressure is measured by
the piezometer at the same time as the cone resistance, and sleeve friction is recorded.
Because of the limited thickness of the piezometer (the filter is around 5 mm), much thinner
layers can be determined with greater accuracy than with a conventional cone penetrometer.
If the piezocone is kept at a given depth so that the pore water pressure can dissipate with
time, then this allows assessment of the in situ permeability and consolidation characteristics
of the soil to be made (Sills and Hird, 2005).
Because soft clays may suffer disturbance when sampled and therefore give unreliable
results when tested for strength in the laboratory, a vane test may be used to measure the in situ
undrained shear strength. Vane tests can be used in clays that have a consistency varyingfrom
very soft to firm. In its simplest form, the shear vane apparatus consists of four blades
arranged in cruciform fashion and attached to the end of a rod (Fig. 7.15). To eliminate
the effects of friction of the soil on the vane rods during the test, all rotating parts, other than
the vane, are enclosed in guide tubes. The vane normally is housed in a protective shoe. The
vane and rods are pushed into the soil from the surface or the base of a borehole to a point
0.5 m above the required depth of testing. Then, the vane is pushed out of the protective shoe
and advanced to the test position. It then is rotated at a rate of 6 to 12∞per minute. The torque
is applied to the vane rods by means of a torque-measuring instrument mounted at ground
336
Chapter 7
Figure 7.13
An electric penetrometer tip. (a) without friction sleeve, (b) with friction sleeve.
level and clamped to the borehole casing or rigidly fixed to the ground. The maximum torque
required for rotation is recorded. When the vane is rotated, the soil fails along a cylindrical
surface defined by the edges of the vane as well as along the horizontal surfaces at the top
and bottom of the blades. The shearing resistance is obtained from the following expression:
M
t =
Ê D2H D3ˆ (7.3)
p Á + ˜
Ë 2 6 ¯
where tis the shearing resistance, Dand Hare the diameter and height of the vane, respectively,
and Mis the torque. Tests in clays with high organic contents or with pockets of sand or silt are
likely to produce erratic results. The results therefore should be related to borehole evidence.
Loading tests can be carried out on loading plates in soils or rocks (Fig. 7.16a). However, just
because the ground immediately beneath a plate is capable of carrying a heavy load without
excessive settlement, this does not necessarily mean that the ground will carry the proposed
337
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.14
Typical record of cone penetrometer test.
structural load. This is especially the case where a weaker horizon occurs at depth but is still
within the influence of the bulb of pressure that will be generated by the structure (Fig. 7.16b).
The plate-loading test provides information by which the bearing capacity and settlement
characteristics of a foundation can be assessed (Matthews and Clayton, 2004). Such a test
may be carried out in a trial pit, usually at excavation base level. Plates vary in size from 0.15
to 1.0 m in diameter. Tomlinson (2001) recommended that a 300 mm plate was the minimum
size that should be used in stiff fissured clays in order to obtain their undrained shear
strength. If the deformation modulus is required for such soils, then Tomlinson recommended
a plate size of 750 mm. The plate should be bedded properly and the test carried out on
undisturbed material so that reliable results may be obtained. The load is applied by a
hydraulic jack bearing against beams supporting kentledge, or reaction may be provided by
ground anchors or tension piles installed on either side of the load position. The load may be
applied in increments, either of one-fifth of the proposed bearing pressure or in steps of 25
to 50 kPa (these are smaller in soft soils, i.e. where the settlement under the first increment
of 25 kPa is greater than 0.002D, D being the diameter of the plate). Successive increments
338
Chapter 7
Figure 7.15
Shear vane tests, (a) borehole vane test, (b) penetration vane test.
should be made after settlement has ceased. The test generally is continued up to two or
three times the proposed loading or in clays until settlement equal to 10 to 20% of the plate
dimension is reached or the rate of increase of settlement becomes excessive. When the final
increment is applied in clays, the load should be maintained until the rate of settlement
becomes less than 0.1 mm in 2 h. This can be regarded as the completion of the primary
consolidation stage. Settlement curves can be drawn with this information from which the
ultimate loading can be determined and an evaluation of Young’s modulus made. At the end
of the consolidation stage, the plate can be unloaded in the same incremental steps in order
to obtain an unloading curve.
339
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.16
(a) Plate load test. With the permission of the Director of the Building Research Establishment. (b) Bulb of pressure developed
beneath a foundation compared with one developed beneath a plate load test.
The screw plate is a variant of the plate load test in which a helical screw is rotated into the
ground to the depths at which the test is to be conducted. The test has the advantage that
no excavation or drilling are needed, and it can be performed beneath the water table.
Unfortunately, however, screwing the plate into the soil may cause disturbance around the plate.
Large-plate-bearing tests frequently are used to determine the value of Young’s modulus of the
foundation rock at large civil engineering sites, such as at dam sites. Loading of the order of sev-
eral mega-newtons is required to obtain measurable deformation of representative areas. The area
of rock load is usually 1 m2. Tests may be carried out in specially excavated galleries in order to
340
Chapter 7
provide a sufficiently strong reaction point for the loading jacks to bear against. The test programme
normally includes cycles of loading and unloading. Such tests show that during loading a notice-
able increase in rigidity normally occurs in the rock mass and that during unloading a very small
deformation occurs for the high stresses applied, with very large recuperation of deformation being
observed for stresses near zero. This is due to joint closure. Once the joints are closed, the adhe-
sion between the faces prevents their opening until a certain unloading is reached. However, when
brittle rocks such as granite, basalt and limestone have been tested, they generally have given
linear stress–strain curves and have not exhibited hysteresis.
Variations of the plate-load test include the freyssinet jack test. This is placed in a narrow slit in a
rock mass and then grouted into position so that each face is in uniform contact with the rock.
Pressure then is applied to the jack. Unless careful excavation, particularly if blasting, takes place in
Figure 7.17
The Menard pressuremeter.
341
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
the testing area, the results of a test may be worthless. All loose rock must be removed before cut-
ting the slot. Freyssinet jacks can be used to measure residual stress as well as Young’s modulus.
The Menard pressuremeter is used to determine the in situ strength of the ground (Fig. 7.17).
It is particularly useful in those soils from which undisturbed samples cannot be obtained
readily. This pressuremeter consists essentially of a probe that is placed in a borehole at the
appropriate depth and then expanded. Where possible the test is carried out in an unlined
hole but if necessary a special slotted casing is used to provide support. The probe consists
of a cylindrical metal body over which are fitted three cylinders. A rubber membrane covers
the cylinders and is clamped between them to give three independent cells. The cells are inflated
with water and a common gas pressure is applied by a volumeter located at the surface, thus a
radial stress is applied to the soil. The deformations produced by the central cell are indicated on
the volumeter. A simple pressuremeter test consists of 10 or more equal pressure increments with
corresponding volume change readings, taken to the ultimate failure strength of the soil con-
cerned. Four volume readings are made at each pressure step at time intervals of 15, 30, 60 and
120 s after the pressure has stabilized. It is customary to unload the soil at the end of the elastic
phase of expansion and to repeat the test before proceeding to the ultimate failure pressure.
This test thus provides the ultimate bearing capacity of soils as well as their deformation
modulus. The test can be applied to any type of soil, and takes into account the influence of
discontinuities. It also can be used in weathered zones of rock masses and in weak rocks such
as some shales and marls. It provides an almost continuous method of in situ testing.
The major advantage of a self-boring pressuremeter is that a borehole is unnecessary.
Consequently, the interaction between the probe and the soil is improved. Self-boring is
brought about either by jetting or using a chopping tool (Fig. 7.18). For example, the
camkometer has a special cutting head so that it penetrates soft ground to form a cylindrical
cavity of its exact dimensions and thereby creates a minimum of disturbance (Fig. 7.18b).
The camkometer measures the lateral stress, undrained stress–strain properties and the
peak stress of soft clays and sands in situ. Clarke (1990) described the use of the self-boring
pressuremeter test to determine the in situ consolidation characteristics of clay soils.
A dilatometer can be used in a drillhole to obtain data relating to the deformability of a rock
mass (Fig. 7.19). These instruments range up to about 300 mm in diameter and over 1 m in
length and can exert pressures of up to 20 MPa on the drillhole walls. Diamentral strains can
be measured either directly along two perpendicular diameters or by measuring the amount
of liquid pumped into the instrument. The last method is less accurate and is only used when
the rock is very deformable.
In an in situ shear test, a block of rock is sheared from a rock surface while a horizontal
jack exerts a vertical load. It is advantageous to make the tests inside galleries, where
342
Chapter 7
Figure 7.18
(a) Schematic diagram of self-boring pressuremeter. This pressuremeter is available in three diameters (65, 100 and 132 mm).
The injection fluid flow that can be applied is limited by the section of flexible pipe (A). Consequently, this pressuremeter can
be used only in fine sands or soft cohesive soils. (b) The Camkometer breaks up the soil with a chopping tool rotated by a drill
string driven from the surface. The chopping tool (1) is driven by a hollow middle rod (2) through which water is driven under
pressure. This rod turns freely within a tube (3) used for removing sediment to the surface. There also is a tube (4) that carries
the pressiometric cell (5) that may be equipped with a pore pressure tap (6). The pressiometeric cell supply and measurement
lines (7) run through the annulus between the two tubes. (c) Self-boring pressuremeter probe with built in motor.
Figure 7.19
Adilatometer.
343
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.20
The in situ shear test apparatus.
reactions for the jacks are readily available (Fig. 7.20). The tests are performed at
various normal loads and give an estimate of the angle of shearing resistance and cohesion
of the rock. The value of this test in very jointed and heterogeneous rocks is severely limited
both because of the difficulty in isolating undisturbed test blocks and because the results
cannot be translated to the scale of conditions of the actual structure and its foundation. In
situ shear tests usually are performed on blocks, 700 ¥ 700 mm2, cut in the rock. These tests
can be made on the same rock where it shows different degrees of alteration and can be
used to derive the shear strength parameters along discontinuities.
Field Instrumentation
When some degree of risk is involved in construction, some type of field instrumentation may
be required in order to provide a continual check on the stability of the structure during its life
span. Furthermore, field observations of both the magnitude and rate of subsurface ground
344
Chapter 7
movements are needed in connection with deep excavations, slope stability and earth and
rockfill dam construction. Such instrumentation needs to assess the pore water pressure,
deformation and stress and strain in the ground. However, an instrumentation programme
does not usually constitute part of a site investigation.
Surface deformation either in the form of settlements or horizontal movements can be monitored
by precise surveying methods, the use of electronic distance measurement, EDM, or laser
equipment providing particularly accurate results. Settlement, for example, can be recorded by
positioning reference marks on the structures concerned and readings being taken by precise
surveying methods. The observations are related to nearby bench marks. Vertical movements
also can be determined by settlement tubes or by water-level or mercury-filled gauges.
Borehole extensometers are used to measure the vertical displacement of the ground at
different depths. A single-rod extensometer is anchored in a borehole, and movement between
the anchor and the reference tube is monitored. Multiple-rod installations monitor displacements
at various depths using rods of various lengths. Each rod is isolated by a close-fitting plastic
sleeve and the complete assembly is grouted into place, fixing the anchors to the ground while
allowing free movement of each rod within its sleeve (Fig. 7.21a). A precise borehole exten-
someter consists of circular magnets embedded in the ground, which act as markers, and reed
switch sensors move in a central access tube to locate the positions of the magnets (Fig. 7.21b).
An inclinometer is used to measure horizontal movements below ground and relies on the
measurement of the angle a pendulum makes with the vertical at given positions in a spe-
cially cased borehole (Fig. 7.22). The gravity-operated pendulum transmits electrical signals
to a recorder, and a vertical profile thereby is obtained. Sets of readings over a period of time
enable both the magnitude and rate of horizontal movement to be determined.
The measurement of stress, contact pressures and stress change may be made in two ways.
Strain may be measured and then converted to stress, or stress may be measured directly
by an earth pressure cell such as the Glotzl cell. This is a hydraulic (flat diaphragm) cell that
has a high stiffness at constant temperature and is used for measuring contact pressures.
An earth cell must be placed in position in such a way as to minimize disturbance of the stress
and strain distribution. Ideally, an earth pressure cell should have the same elastic properties
as the surrounding soil. This, of course, cannot be attained, and in order to minimize the mag-
nitude of error (i.e. the cell action factor), the ratio of the thickness to the diameter of the cell
should not exceed 0.2 and the ratio of the diameter to the deflection of the diaphragm must
be 2000 or greater. Most strain measurements in soils and soft rocks are deformation
measurements that are interpreted in terms of strain. A strain cell is required to move with the
soil without causing it to be reinforced. In order to record strain, it is necessary to monitor the
relative movements of two fixed points at either end of a gauge length. Strain cells with a
345
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.21
(a) Multiple rod extensometer. (b) Magnetic probe extensometer.
positive connection between their end plates have difficulty in measuring small strains. This
can be overcome by substituting separated strain cells at either end of the gauge length.
Geophysical Methods: Indirect Site Exploration
A geophysical exploration may be included in a site investigation for an important engineer-
ing project in order to provide subsurface information over a large area at reasonable cost.
346
Chapter 7
Figure 7.22
Borehole inclinometer.
The information obtained may help eliminate less favourable alternative sites, may aid the
location of test holes in critical areas and may prevent unnecessary repetitive boring or
drilling in fairly uniform ground. A geophysical survey not only helps to locate the position of
boreholes or drillholes but also detects variations in subsurface conditions between them.
Boreholes and drillholes provide information about the strata where they are sunk but
provide no information about the ground in between. Nonetheless, boreholes or drillholes to
aid interpretation and correlation of the geophysical measurements are an essential part of
any geophysical survey. Therefore, an appropriate combination of direct and indirect methods
often can yield a high standard of results.
347
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Geophysical methods are used to determine the geological sequence and structure of sub-
surface rocks by the measurement of certain physical properties or forces. The properties
that are made most use of in geophysical exploration are density, elasticity, electrical con-
ductivity, magnetic susceptibility and gravitational attraction. In other words, seismic and
resistivity methods record the artificial fields of force applied to the area under investigation,
while magnetic and gravitational methods measure natural fields of force. The former
techniques have the advantage over the latter in that the depth to which the forces are
applied can be controlled. By contrast, the natural fields of force are fixed and can only be
observed and not controlled. Seismic and resistivity methods are more applicable to the
determination of horizontal or near horizontal changes or contacts, whereas magnetic and
gravimetric methods generally are used to delineate lateral changes or vertical structures.
In a geophysical survey, measurements of the variations in certain physical properties usu-
ally are taken in a traverse across the surface, although they may be made in order to log a
borehole. Generally speaking, observations should be close enough for correlation between
them to be obvious, so enabling interpolation to be carried out without ambiguity (McDowell
et al., 2002). Anomalies in the physical properties measured generally reflect anomalies in
the geological conditions. The ease of recognizing and interpreting these anomalies depends
on the contrast in physical properties that, in turn, influence the choice of method employed.
The actual choice of method to be used for a particular survey may not be difficult to make.
The character and situation of the site also have to be taken into account, especially in built-up
areas, which may be unsuitable for one or other of the geophysical methods either because of the
presence of old buildings or services on the site, interference from some source or lack of space
for carrying out the survey. When dealing with layered rocks, provided their geological structure is
not too complex, seismic methods have a distinct advantage in that they give more detailed, pre-
cise and unambiguous information than any other method. On the other hand, electrical methods
may be preferred for small-scale work, where the structures are simple. On occasions more than
one method may be used to resolve the same problem. However, as McCann et al. (1997) pointed
out, if there is any doubt about the feasibility of a geophysical survey, then a trial survey should be
undertaken to determine the most suitable method. McCann et al. also noted that modern geo-
physical equipment allows downloading of the results to a suitable portable PC so that a prelimi-
nary interpretation can be carried out daily. In this way data can be checked, plotted and
evaluated, and then can be compared with data gathered by other means. As a result, any errors
can be recognized and, if necessary, traverses re-run to gather better information. Indeed, the
survey programme can be modified in the light of any new information obtained.
Seismic Methods
The sudden release of energy from the detonation of an explosive charge in the ground or
the mechanical pounding of the surface generates shock waves that radiate out in a
348
Chapter 7
hemispherical wave front from the point of release. The waves generated are compressional,
P, dilational shear, S, and surface waves. The velocities of the shock waves generally increase
with depth below the surface since the elastic moduli increase with depth. The compressional
waves travel faster, and are generated and recorded more easily than shear waves. They are
therefore used almost exclusively in seismic exploration. The shock wave velocity depends on
many variables, including rock fabric, mineralogy and pore water. In general, velocities in crystalline
rocks are high to very high (Table 7.4). Velocities in sedimentary rocks increase with amount of
consolidation and decrease in pore fluids and with increase in the degree of cementation and dia-
genesis. Unconsolidated sedimentary deposits have maximum velocities varying as a function of
the volume of voids, either air filled or water filled, mineralogy and grain size.
When seismic waves pass from one layer to another in the ground, some energy is reflected
back towards the surface while the remainder is refracted. Thus, two methods of seismic sur-
veying can be distinguished, that is, seismic reflection and seismic refraction. Measurement
of the time taken from the generation of the shock waves until they are recorded by detector
arrays forms the basis of the two methods.
The seismic reflection method is the most extensively used of all geophysical techniques, its
principal employment being in the oil industry. In this technique, the depth of investigation is
large compared with the distance from the shot to detector array. This is to exclude refrac-
tion waves. Indeed, the method is able to record information from a large number of horizons
down to depths of several thousands of metres.
In seismic refraction, one ray approaches the interface between two rock types at a critical
angle that means that, if the ray is passing from a low, V , to a high velocity V layer, it will
o 1
be refracted along the upper boundary of the latter layer (Fig. 7.23). After refraction, the pulse
travels along the interface with velocity V . The material at the boundary is subjected to
1
Table 7.4. Velocities of compressional waves of some common rocks
V (km s- 1) V (km s- 1)
p p
Igneous rocks Sedimentary rocks
Basalt 5.2–6.4 Gypsum 2.0–3.5
Dolerite 5.8–6.6 Limestone 2.8–7.0
Gabbro 6.5–6.7 Sandstone 1.4–4.4
Granite 5.5–6.1 Shale 2.1–4.4
Metamorphicrocks Unconsolidated deposits
Gneiss 3.7–7.0 Alluvium 0.3–0.6
Marble 3.7–6.9 Sands and gravels 0.3–1.8
Quartzite 5.6–6.1 Clay (wet) 1.5–2.0
Schist 3.5–5.7 Clay (sandy) 2.0–2.4
349
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.23
Time–distance graphs for a theoretical single-layer problem, with parallel interface. With non-parallel interfaces, both forward
and reverse profiles must be surveyed.
oscillating stress from below. This generates new disturbances along the boundary that travel
upwards through the low velocity rock and eventually reach the surface.
At short distances from the point where the shock waves are generated, the geophones
record direct waves, while at a critical distance, both the direct and refracted waves arrive at
the same time. Beyond this, because the rays refracted along the high velocity layer travel
faster than those through the low velocity layer above, they reach the geophones first.
In refraction work the object is to develop a time–distance graph that involves plotting arrival
times against geophone spacing (Fig. 7.23). Hence, the distance between geophones,
together with the total length and arrangement of the array, has to be chosen carefully to suit
each particular problem.
350
Chapter 7
The most common arrangement in refraction work is profile shooting. Here, the explosive shot
or impact points and geophones are laid out in long lines, with geophones receiving refracted
waves from the impacts or shots fired. The process is repeated at uniform intervals. In many
surveys for civil engineering purposes where it is required to determine depth to bedrock, it may
be sufficient to record from two shotpoint distances at each end of the receiving spread. By tra-
versing in both directions in simple geological conditions, the angle of dip can be determined.
In the simple case of refraction by a single high velocity layer at depth, the travel time for the
seismic wave that proceeds directly from the impact point to the detectors and the travel time
for the critical refracted wave to arrive at the geophones are plotted graphically against
geophone spacing (Fig. 7.23). The depth, Z, to the high velocity layer then can be obtained
from the graph by using the expression:
XÊV- V ˆ
Z= Á 1 0˜ (7.4)
2Ë V +V ¯
1 0
where V is the speed in the low velocity layer, V the speed in the high velocity layer and
o 1
X is the critical distance. The method also works for multi-layered rock sequences if each
layer is thick enough and transmits seismic waves at higher speeds than the one above it.
However, in the refraction method, a low velocity layer underlying a high velocity layer usu-
ally cannot be detected as in such an inversion the pulse is refracted into the low velocity
layer. Also, a layer of intermediate velocity between an underlying refractor and overlying
layers can be masked as a first arrival on the travel-time curve. The latter is known as a
blind zone. The position of faults also can be estimated from the time–distance graphs.
As noted in the preceding text, the velocity of shock waves is related to the elastic moduli
and can therefore provide data relating to the engineering performance of the ground.
Young’s modulus, E, and Poisson’s ratio, u, can be derived by using the following
expressions if the density, r, and compressional, V , and shear, V , wave velocities are
p s
known:
(1+)u (1- )u2 (7.5)
E=rV2
p (1- )u
or
E=2V2r(1+u ) (7.6)
S
351
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
or
E=V S2 r È Í 3(V p/V s)2- 4˘ ˙ (7.7)
g ÎÍ (V /V)2- 1˚˙
p s
or
0.5(V /V )2- 1 (7.8)
u = P S
(V /V )2- 1
P S
where g is the acceleration due to gravity.
These dynamic moduli correspond to the initial tangent moduli of the stress–strain curve for
an instantaneously applied load and are usually higher than those obtained in static tests.
The frequency and nature of discontinuities within a rock mass affect its deformability.
In other words, a highly discontinuous rock mass exhibits a lower compressional wave
velocity than a massive rock mass of the same type. The influence of discontinuities on the
deformability of a rock mass can be estimated from a comparison of its in situ compressional
velocity, V , and the laboratory sonic velocity, V , determined from an intact specimen taken
pf pl
from the rock mass. The velocity ratio, V /V , reflects the deformability and so can be used
pf pl
as a quality index. A comparison of the velocity ratio with other rock quality indices is given
in Table 2.7.
Resistivity Methods
The resistivity of rocks and soils varies within a wide range. Since most of the principal rock
forming minerals are practically insulators, the resistivity of rocks and soils is determined by
the amount of conducting mineral constituents and the content of mineralized water in the
pores. The latter condition is by far the dominant factor, and in fact, most rocks and soils con-
duct an electric current only because they contain water. The widely differing resistivity
values of the various types of impregnating water can cause variations in the resistivity of
rocks ranging from a few tenths of an ohm-metre to hundreds of ohm-metres (W m) as can
be seen from Table 7.5.
In the resistivity method, an electric current is introduced into the ground by means of two
current electrodes and the potential difference between two potential electrodes is measured.
It is preferable to measure the potential drop or apparent resistance directly in ohms rather
than observe both current and voltage. The ohms value is converted to apparent
resistivity by use of a factor that depends on the particular electrode configuration in use
(see below).
352
Chapter 7
Table 7.5. Resistivity of some types of natural water
Type of water Resistivity in Wm
Meteoric water, derived from precipitation 30 to 1000
Surface waters, in districts of igneous rocks 30 to 500
Surface waters, in districts of sedimentary rocks 10 to 100
Groundwater, in areas of igneous rocks 30 to 150
Groundwater, in areas of sedimentary rocks Larger than 1
Sea water About 0.2
The relation between the depth of penetration and the electrode spacing is given in Figure 7.24,
from which it can be seen that 50% of the total current passes above a depth equal to about
half the electrode separation and 70% flows within a depth equal to the electrode
separation. Analysis of the variation in the value of apparent resistivity with respect to
electrode separation enables inferences about the subsurface formations to be drawn.
The resistivity method is based on the fact that any subsurface variation in conductivity alters
the pattern of current flow in the ground and therefore changes the distribution of electric
potential at the surface. Since the electrical resistivity of such factors as superficial deposits
and bedrock differ from each other, the resistivity method may be used in their detection and
to give their approximate thicknesses, relative positions and depths (Table 7.6). The first step
in any resistivity survey should be to conduct a resistivity depth sounding at the site of a
borehole in order to establish a correlation between resistivity and lithological layers.
If a correlation cannot be established, then an alternative method is required.
Figure 7.24
Fraction of total current, I, which passes above a horizontal plane at depth, Z, as a function of the distance, L, between two
current electrodes.
353
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 7.6. Resistivity values of some common rock types
Rock type Resistivity (Wm)
Topsoil 5–50
Peat and clay 8–50
Clay, sand and gravel mixtures 40–250
Saturated sand and gravel 40–100
Moist to dry sand and gravel 100–3000
Mudstones, marls and shales 8–100
Sandstones and limestones 100–1000
Crystalline rocks 200–10 000
The electrodes normally are arranged along a straight line, the potential electrodes being
placed inside the current electrodes and all four are disposed symmetrically with respect to
the centre of the configuration. The configurations of the symmetric type that are used most
frequently are those introduced by Wenner and Schlumberger. Other configurations
include the dipole–dipole and the pole–dipole arrays. In the Wenner configuration, the
distances between all four electrodes are equal, whereas the distances between the
potential electrodes and the centre of the array in the Schlumberger configuration are less
than those between the current and potential electrodes (Fig. 7.25). The expressions used
to compute the apparent resistivity, r , for the Wenner and Schlumberger configurations
a
are as follows:
Wenner:
r =2p aR (7.9)
a
Schlumberger:
r =p (L2- l2) ¥ R (7.10)
a 2l
where a, Land lare explained in Figure 7.25 and Ris the resistance reading.
Horizontal profiling is used to determine variations in apparent resistivity in a horizontal
direction at a pre-selected depth. For this purpose, an electrode configuration, with fixed
inter-electrode distances, is moved along a straight traverse, resistivity determinations being
made at stations located at regular intervals. The length of the electrode configuration must
be carefully chosen because it is the dominating factor in depth penetration. The data of a
constant-separation survey consisting of a series of traverses arranged in a grid pattern, may
354
Chapter 7
Figure 7.25
Wenner and Schlumberger configurations.
be used to construct a contour map of lines of equal resistivity. These maps often are useful
in locating areas of anomalous resistivity such as gravel pockets in clay soils and the trend
of buried channels. Even so, interpretation of resistivity maps as far as the delineation of
lateral variations is concerned is mainly qualitative.
Electrical sounding furnishes information concerning the vertical succession of different
conducting zones and their individual thicknesses and resistivities. For this reason, the
method is particularly valuable for investigations on horizontally stratified ground. In electrical
sounding, the mid-point of the electrode configuration is fixed at the observation station while
the length of the configuration is increased gradually, that is, in the Wenner configuration, the
distances between all four electrodes is increased progressively. Only the current electrodes
are moved outwards about a station after each reading in the case of the Schlumberger
configuration. As a result the current penetrates deeper and deeper, the apparent resistivity
being measured each time the current electrodes are moved outwards. The readings,
therefore, become increasingly affected by the resistivity conditions at advancing depths.
The Schlumberger configuration is preferable to the Wenner configuration for depth
sounding. The data obtained usually is plotted as a graph of apparent resistivity against
electrode separation in the case of the Wenner array, or half the current electrode separation
for the Schlumberger array. The electrode separation at which inflection points occur in the
graph provide an idea of the depth of interfaces. The apparent resistivities of the different
parts of the curve provide some idea of the relative resistivities of the layers concerned.
If the ground approximates to an ideal condition, then a quantitative solution, involving a
curve-fitting exercise, should be possible. The technique requires a comparison of the
observed curve with a series of master curves prepared for various theoretical models.
355
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Generally, it is not possible to determine the depths to more than three or four layers. If a
second layer is relatively thin and its resistivity much larger or smaller than that of the first
layer, the interpretation of its lower contact will be inaccurate. For all depth determinations
from resistivity soundings, it is assumed that there is no change in resistivity laterally. This is
not the case in practice. Indeed, sometimes the lateral change is greater than that occurring
with increasing depth, and so corrections have to be applied for the lateral effects when depth
determinations are made.
Electromagnetic Methods
A wide variety of electromagnetic survey methods are available, each involving the measure-
ment of one or more electric or magnetic field components induced in the ground by a primary
field. A primary field is produced by a natural (transient) current source or an alternating
current artificial source, and this field spreads out in space above and below the ground,
inducing currents in subsurface conductors. Secondary electromagnetic fields are produced
by these currents that distort the primary field. The resultant field differs from the primary
field in intensity, phase and direction, and so can be detected by a suitable receiving coil.
The secondary field induced in the subsurface conductor fades gradually when a transient
primary field is switched off, fading being slower in media of higher conductivity. Hence,
measurement of the rate at which the secondary currents fade and their field offers a means
of detecting anomalously conducting bodies.
The terrain conductivity meter represents a means of measuring the conductivity of the
ground. Electromagnetic energy is introduced into the ground by inductive coupling produced
by passing an alternating current through a coil. The receiver also detects its signal by
induction. The conductivity meter is carried along traverse lines across a site and can provide
a direct continuous readout. Hence, surveys can be carried out quickly. Conductivity values
are taken at positions set out on a grid pattern. Corrected values of conductivity can be
plotted as contoured maps of conductivity. Where the thickness of overburden varies within
fairly narrow limits and the conductivities of the overburden and bedrock do not change
appreciably, the depth to bedrock can be estimated from standard curves. As these depth
values are approximate, they need to be checked against borehole evidence or data obtained
from more quantitative geophysical methods.
The very-low-frequency, VLF, method is the most widely used fixed-source method
operating on a single frequency, making use of powerful radio transmitters. A disadvantage
is that wave penetration is limited. The method also is affected by topography. The interpretation
of VLF data generally is qualitative, and it frequently is used for reconnaissance
work. The method is well suited to detecting near-vertical contacts and fracture zones.
356
Chapter 7
As a consequence, the method has found particular application in site investigations for the
delineation of faults.
The ground probing radar method is based upon the transmission of pulsed electromagnetic
waves in the frequency range 1 to 1000 MHz. In this method, the travel times of the waves
reflected from subsurface interfaces are recorded as they arrive at the surface, and the depth, Z,
to an interface is derived from:
Z=VT/2 (7.11)
where V is the velocity of the radar pulse and T is its travel time. The conductivity of the
ground imposes the greatest limitation on the use of radar probing, that is, the depth to which
radar energy can penetrate depends upon the effective conductivity of the strata being
probed. This, in turn, is governed chiefly by the water content and its salinity. Furthermore,
the value of effective conductivity is also a function of temperature and density, as well as the
frequency of the electromagnetic waves being propagated. The least penetration occurs in
saturated clayey materials or where the moisture content is saline. For example, attenuation
of electromagnetic energy in wet clay and silt mean that depth of penetration frequently is
less than 1 m. The technique appears to be reasonably successful in sandy soils and rocks
in which the moisture content is non-saline. Rocks such as limestone and granite can be
penetrated for distances of tens of metres and in dry conditions the penetration may reach
100 m. Ground probing radars have been used for a variety of purposes in geotechnical
engineering, for example, the detection of fractures and faults in rock masses, the location of
subsurface voids and the delineation of contaminated plumes.
Magnetic Methods
All rocks, mineral and ore deposits are magnetized to a lesser or greater extent by the Earth’s
magnetic field. As a consequence, in magnetic surveying, accurate measurements are made
of the anomalies produced in the local geomagnetic field by this magnetization. The intensity
of magnetization and hence the amount by which the Earth’s magnetic field is changed
locally depend on the magnetic susceptibility of the material concerned. In addition to the
magnetism induced by the Earth’s field, rocks possess a permanent magnetism that depends
on their history.
Rocks have different magnetic susceptibilities related to their mineral content. Some miner-
als, for example, quartz and calcite are magnetized reversely to the field direction, and
therefore have negative susceptibility and are described as diamagnetic. Paramagnetic
minerals, which are the majority, are magnetized along the direction of magnetic field so that
357
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
their susceptibility is positive. The susceptibility of the ferromagnetic minerals, such as
magnetite, ilmenite, pyrrhotite and hematite, is a very complicated function of the field intensity.
However, since the magnitudes of their susceptibility amount to 10 to 105times the order of
susceptibility of the paramagnetic and diamagnetic minerals, the ferromagnetic minerals can
be found by magnetic field measurements.
If the magnetic field ceases to act on a rock, then the magnetization of paramagnetic and
diamagnetic minerals disappears. However, in ferromagnetic minerals the induced magneti-
zation is diminished only to a certain value. This residuum is called remanent magnetization
and is of great importance in rocks. All igneous rocks have a very high remanent magnetiza-
tion acquired as they cooled down in the Earth’s magnetic field. In the geological past, during
sedimentation in water, grains of magnetic materials were orientated by ancient geomagnetic
fields so that some sedimentary rocks show stable remanent magnetization.
The strength of the magnetic field is measured in nanoteslas (nT), and the average strength
of the Earth’s magnetic field is about 50,000 nT. Obviously, the variations associated with
magnetized rock formations are very much smaller than this. The intensity of magnetization
and consequently the amount by which the Earth’s magnetic field changes locally depends
on magnetic susceptibility of the rocks concerned.
Aeromagnetic surveying has almost completely supplanted ground surveys for regional
reconnaissance purposes. Accurate identification of the plan position of the aircraft for the
whole duration of the magnetometer record is essential. The object is to produce an aero-
magnetic map, the base map with transcribed magnetic values being contoured.
The aim of most ground surveys is to produce isomagnetic contour maps of anomalies to
enable the form of the causative magnetized body to be estimated (Fig. 7.26). Profiles are
surveyed across the trend of linear anomalies with stations, if necessary, at intervals of as
little as 1 m. A base station is set up beyond the anomaly where the geomagnetic field is
uniform. The reading at the base station is taken as zero, and all subsequent readings are
expressed as plus-or-minus differences. Corrections need to be made for the temperature of
the instrument as the magnets lose their effectiveness with increasing temperature.
A planetary correction also is required that eliminates the normal variation of the Earth’s
magnetic field with latitude. Large metallic objects such as pylons are a serious handicap to
magnetic investigation and must be kept at a sufficient distance as it is difficult to correct for them.
A magnetometer also may be used for mapping geological structures. For example, in some
thick sedimentary sequences, it is sometimes possible to delineate the major structural features
because the succession includes magnetic horizons. These may be ferruginous sandstones or
shales, tuffs or basic lava flows. In such circumstances, anticlines produce positive and
358
Chapter 7
Figure 7.26
Magnetometer survey of a site for proposed flats in which mine shafts occurred at A, B and C (after Cripps et al., 1998).
synclines negative anomalies. Faults and dykes are indicated on isomagnetic maps by linear
belts of somewhat sharp gradient or by sudden swings in the trend of the contours. However,
in many areas the igneous and metamorphic basement rocks, which underlie the sedimen-
tary sequence, are the predominant influence controlling the pattern of anomalies since they
usually are far more magnetic than the sediments above. Where the basement rocks are brought
near the surface in structural highs, the magnetic anomalies are large and characterised by
359
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
strong relief. Conversely, deep sedimentary basins usually produce contours with low values
and gentle gradients on isomagnetic maps.
Magnetic surveying has been used to detect abandoned mine shafts, a proton precession
magnetometer normally being used (Bell, 1988c). A good subsurface magnetic contrast may
be obtained if the shaft is lined with iron tubbing or with bricks or if the shaft is filled and the
filling consists of burnt shale or ash or contains scrap iron. On the other hand, if a shaft is
unfilled and unlined or lined with timber, then it may not give rise to a measurable anomaly.
Gravity Methods
The Earth’s gravity field varies according to the density of the subsurface rocks, but at any
particular locality, its magnitude also is influenced by latitude, elevation, neighbouring
topographical features and the tidal deformation of the Earth’s crust. The effects of these
latter factors have to be eliminated in any gravity survey, where the object is to measure the
variations in acceleration due to gravity precisely. This information then can be used to
construct a contoured gravity map. In survey work, modern practice is to measure anomalies
in gravity units (g.u. =10- 6m s- 2). Modern gravity meters used in exploration measure not the
absolute value of the acceleration due to gravity but the small differences in this value
between one place and the next.
Gravity methods are used mainly in regional reconnaissance surveys to reveal anomalies
that may be investigated subsequently by other methods. Since the gravitational effects of
geological bodies are proportional to the contrast in density between them and their
surroundings, gravity methods are particularly suitable for the location of structures in strati-
fied formations. Gravity effects due to local structures in near surface strata may be partly
obscured or distorted by regional gravity effects caused by large-scale basement structures.
However, regional deep-seated gravity effects can be removed or minimized in order to
produce a residual gravity map showing the effects of shallow structures that may be of interest.
A gravity survey is conducted from a local base station at which the value of the acceleration
due to gravity is known with reference to a fundamental base where the acceleration due to
gravity has been accurately measured. The way in which a gravity survey is carried out
largely depends on the objective in view. Large-scale surveys covering hundreds of square
kilometres, carried out in order to reveal major geological structures, are done by vehicle or
helicopter with a density of only a few stations per square kilometre. For more detailed work
such as the delineation of basic minor intrusions or the location of faults, spacing between sta-
tions may be as small as 20 m. Because gravity differences large enough to be of geological
significance are produced by changes in elevation of several millimetres and of only 30 m in
360
Chapter 7
north-south distance, the location and elevation of stations must be established with very high
precision.
Micro-gravity meters have been used to detect subsurface voids such as caverns in
limestone, or abandoned mine shafts or shallow workings (Styles and Thomas, 2001).
Gravity “lows” are recorded over voids, and they are more notable over air-filled than
water- or sediment-filled voids.
Drillhole Logging Techniques
Drillhole logging techniques can be used to identify some of the physical properties of rocks.
For example, the electrical resistivity method makes use of various electrode configurations
down-the-hole. As the instrument is raised from the bottom to the top of the hole, it provides
a continuous record of the variations in resistivity of the wall rock. In the normal or standard
resistivity configuration, there are two potential electrodes and one current electrode in the
sonde. The depth of penetration of the electric current from the drillhole is influenced by
the electrode spacing. In a short normal resistivity survey, spacing is about 400 mm, whereas
in a long normal survey, spacing generally is between 1.5 and 1.75 m. Unfortunately, in such
a survey, because of the influence of thicker adjacent beds, thin resistive beds yield resistiv-
ity values that are much too low, while thin conductive beds produce values that are too high.
The microlog technique may be used in such situations. In this technique the electrodes are very
closely spaced (25–50 mm) and are in contact with the wall of the drillhole. This allows the
detection of small lithological changes so that much finer detail is obtained than with the normal
electric log (Fig. 7.30). A microlog is particularly useful in recording the position of permeable
beds. If, for some reason, the current tends to flow between the electrodes on the sonde instead
of into the rocks, then the laterolog or guard electrode is used. The laterolog 7 has seven elec-
trodes in an array that focuses the current into the strata of the drillhole wall. The microlaterolog,
a focused micro-device, is used in such a situation instead of the microlog.
A dipmeter generally is a four-arm side-wall micro-resistivity device. It measures small
variations in the resistivity of a formation that allows the relative vertical shift of characteristic
pattern variation produced by bedding planes, discontinuities or lithological changes to be
used to determine, by aid of computer analysis, the attitude of a plane intersecting a drillhole.
In this way, a fracture log can be produced.
Induction logging may be used when an electrical log cannot be obtained. In this technique,
the sonde sends electrical energy into the strata horizontally and therefore only measures
the resistivity immediately opposite the sonde, unlike in normal electrical logging where the
current flows between electrodes. As a consequence, the resistivity is measured directly in
361
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.27
Drillhole logging curves. Microresistivity curves are shown on the right. Permeable portions of the penetrated section are indi-
cated (cross-hatched bars) by extensions of the 50-mm micronormal curve beyond the microinverse. Note that the diameter of
the bore, as recorded by the microlog calliper, is smaller than bit size where a mud filter cake is formed at the position of per-
meable beds. Standard electrical logs of the same stratigraphic interval are shown on the left for comparison.
an induction log, whereas in a normal electrical log, since the current flows across the stratal
boundaries, it is measured indirectly from the electrical log curves. A gamma ray log usually
is run with an induction log in order to reveal the boundaries of stratal units.
A spontaneous potential, SP, log is obtained by lowering a sonde down a drillhole that
generates a small electric voltage at the boundaries of permeable rock units and especially
between such strata and less permeable beds. For example, permeable sandstones show
362
Chapter 7
large SPs, whereas shales typically are represented by low values. If sandstone and shale
are interbedded, then the SP curve has numerous troughs separated by sharp or rounded
peaks, the widths of which vary in proportion to the thicknesses of the sandstones.
Spontaneous potential logs frequently are recorded at the same time as resistivity logs.
Interpretation of both sets of curves yields precise data on the depth, thickness and position
in the sequence of the beds penetrated by the drillhole. The curves also enable a semi-
quantitative assessment of lithological and hydrogeological characteristics to be made.
The sonic logging device consists of a transmitter–receiver system, transmitters and receivers
being located at given positions on the sonde. The transmitters emit short, high-frequency
pulses several times a second, and differences in travel times between receivers are
recorded in order to obtain the velocities of the refracted waves. The velocity of sonic waves
propagated in sedimentary rocks is largely a function of the character of the matrix. Normally,
beds with high porosities have low velocities and dense rocks are typified by high velocities.
Hence, the porosity of strata can be assessed. In the 3D sonic log, one transmitter and one
receiver are used at a time. This allows both compressional and shear waves to be recorded,
from which, if density values are available, the dynamic elastic moduli of the beds concerned
can be determined. As velocity values vary independently of resistivity or radioactivity, the sonic
log permits differentiation amongst strata that may be less evident on the other types of log.
Radioactive logs include gamma ray or natural gamma, gamma–gamma or formation den-
sity, and neutron logs. They have the advantage of being obtainable through the casing in a
drillhole. On the other hand, the various electric and sonic logs can only be used in uncased
holes. The natural-gamma log provides a record of the natural radioactivity or gamma
radiation from elements such as potassium 40, and uranium and thorium isotopes, in the
rocks. This radioactivity varies widely among sedimentary rocks, being generally high for
clays and shales and lower for sandstones and limestones. Evaporites give very low readings.
The gamma–gamma log uses a source of gamma rays that are sent into the wall of the
drillhole. There they collide with electrons in the rocks and thereby lose energy. The returning
gamma ray intensity is recorded, a high value indicating low electron density and hence low
formation density. The neutron curve is a recording of the effects caused by bombardment of
the strata with neutrons. As the neutrons are absorbed by atoms of hydrogen, which then
emit gamma rays, the log provides an indication of the quantity of hydrogen in the strata
around the sonde. The amount of hydrogen is related to the water (or hydrocarbon) content
and therefore provides another method of estimating porosity. Since carbon is a good
moderator of neutrons, carbonaceous rocks are liable to yield spurious indications as far as
porosity is concerned.
The caliper log measures the diameter of a drillhole. Different sedimentary rocks show a
greater or lesser ability to stand without collapsing from the walls of the drillhole. For instance,
363
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
limestones may present a relatively smooth face slightly larger than the drilling bit whereas
soft shale may cave to produce a much larger diameter. A caliper log is obtained along with
other logs to help interpret the characteristics of the rocks in the drillhole.
Cross-Hole Methods
The cross-hole seismic method is based on the transmission of seismic energy between drill-
holes. In its simplest form, cross-hole seismic measurements are made between a seismic
source in one drillhole (i.e. a small explosive charge, an air gun, a drillhole hammer, or an
electrical sparker) and a receiver at the same depth in an adjacent drillhole. The receiver can
either be a three-component geophone array clamped to the drillhole wall or a hydrophone
in a liquid-filled drillhole to receive signals from an electric sparker in another drillhole simi-
larly filled with liquid. The choice of source and receiver is a function of the distance between
the drillholes, the required resolution and the properties of the rock mass. The best results
are obtained with a high-frequency repetitive source. Generally, the source and receiver in
the two drillholes are moved up and down together. Drillholes must be spaced closely enough
to achieve the required resolution of detail and be within the range of the equipment. This is
up to 400 m in clay, 160 m in chalk, and 80 m in sands and gravels. By contrast, because
soft organic clay is highly attenuating, transmission is possible only over a few metres. These
distances are for saturated material and the effective transmission is reduced considerably in
dry superficial layers.
Such simple cross-hole seismic surveys are limited in the amount of data they produce.
Hence, a system has been developed that uses a multitude of wave paths, thereby enabling
the location, shape and velocity contrast relating to an anomaly or target in the rock mass
between drillholes to be delineated in an unambiguous fashion. This is referred to as seismic
tomography (tomography means a technique used to obtain an image of a selected plane
section of a solid object). The method utilizes two or more drillholes, and possibly the ground
surface, for the location of sources and detectors, the object being to derive one or more two-
dimensional images of seismic properties within the rock mass (Jackson and McCann, 1997).
Cross-hole seismic measurements provide a means by which the engineering properties of the
rock mass between drillholes can be assessed. For example, the dynamic elastic properties
can be obtained from the values of the compressional and shear wave velocities and the for-
mation density (see the preceding text). Other applications include assessment of the conti-
nuity of lithological units between drillholes, identification of fault zones, assessment of the
degree of fracturing and the detection of subsurface voids.
Electromagnetic and electrical resistivity techniques also have been used to produce tomo-
graphic imagery. For example, Corin et al. (1997) used drillhole radar tomography to assess
364
Chapter 7
the foundation conditions for a long viaduct to be constructed in limestone that was regarded
as highly karstified. They concluded that cross-hole methods are probably the best tools
available at present to provide the required detailed information, particularly in regions of
karstic limestone, for good foundation design. Electrical resistance tomography is a relatively
new geophysical imaging technique that uses a number of electrodes in drillholes, and some-
times at the ground surface, to image the resistivity of the subsurface.
Maps for Engineering Purposes
One of the important ways by which the geologist can be of service is by producing maps to aid
the engineer, planner and others who are concerned with the development of land. A varietyof
maps can be produced from engineering geomorphological, environmental geological and
engineering geological to geotechnical maps (Anon,1972). The distinction between these dif-
ferent types of maps is not always clear cut. Be that as it may, maps represent a means of
storing and transmitting information, in particular, of conveying specific information about the
spatial distribution of given factors or conditions. In addition, a map represents a simplified
model of the facts, and the complexity of various geological factors can never be portrayed in
its entirety. The amount of simplification required is governed principally by the purpose and
scale of the map, the relative importance of particular geological factors or relationships, the
accuracy of the data and on the techniques of representation employed.
The purpose of engineering geomorphological maps is to portray the surface form and the
nature and properties of the materials of which the surface is composed, and to indicate the
type and magnitude of the processes in operation. Surface form and pattern of geomorpho-
logical processes often influence the choice of a site. Hence, geomorphological maps give a
rapid appreciation of the nature of the ground and thereby help the design of more detailed
investigations, as well as focusing attention on problem areas. Such maps recognize landforms
along with their delimitation in terms of size and shape (Fig. 7.28). Engineering geomorpho-
logical maps therefore should show how surface expression will influence an engineering
project and should provide an indication of the general environmental relationship of the site
concerned. If engineers are to obtain maximum advantage from a geomorphological survey,
then derivative maps should be compiled from the geomorphological sheets. Such derivative
maps generally are concerned with some aspect of ground conditions, such as landslip areas
or areas prone to flooding or over which sand dunes migrate (Fig. 7.29).
The principal object during an engineering geomorphological survey is the classification of every
component of the land surface in relation to its origin, present evolution and likely material prop-
erties.In other words, a survey should identify the general characteristics of the terrain of an
area, thereby providing a basis for evaluation of alternative locations and avoidance of the
365
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.28
Engineering geomorphology map of the site and situation of a proposed bridge crossing on the Tamur River, eastern Nepal
(after Brunsden et al., 1975). With kind permission of the Geological Society.
366
Chapter 7
Figure 7.29
Geomorphological analysis of a proposed airport site in Dubai wih respect to the threat from mobile sand dunes (after Cooke
et al., 1978). With kind permission of the Geological Society.
worst hazard areas. What is more, an understanding of the past and present development of
an area is likely to aid prediction of its behaviour during and after construction operations.
In addition, factors outside the site that may influence it, such as mass movement, should be
identified and a synopsis of geomorphological development should be provided. Obtaining
such information should facilitate the planning of a subsequent site investigation.
For instance, it should aid the location of boreholes, and these hopefully will confirm what has
been discovered by the geomorphological survey.
Environmental geology maps have been produced to meet the needs of planners (Forster
et al., 2004). It is important that geological information should be understood readily by the
planner and those involved in development. Unfortunately, conventional geological maps
often are inadequate for the needs of such individuals (Section 7.1). Consequently, maps
incorporating geological data are now being produced for planning and land-use purposes.
Such maps are essentially simple and provide some indication of those areas where there
are least geological constraints on development, and so they can be used by the planner or
engineer at the feasibility stage of a project. The location of exploitable mineral resources
also is of interest to planners. The obvious reason for presenting geological data in a way that
can be understood by planners, administrators and engineers is that they then can seek
367
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
appropriate professional advice and, in this way, bring about safer and more cost effective
development and design of land, especially in relation to urban growth and redevelopment.
In fact, two versions of environmental geology maps may be produced, one for the specialist
and the other for the non-specialist.
Topics that are included on environmental geology maps vary, but may include solid geology,
unconsolidated deposits, landslides, hydrogeology, mineral resources, contamination, shal-
low undermining and opencast workings, floodplain hazards, etc. (Fig. 7.30). Each aspect of
geology can be presented as a separate theme on a basic or element map. Environmental
potential maps are compiled from basic data maps. They present, in general terms, the
constraints on development. They also can present those resources with respect to mineral,
groundwater, or agricultural potential that might be used in development or that should not
be sterilized by building over.
Engineering geological maps and plans provide engineers and planners with information that
will assist them in the planning of land use and in the location and construction of engineer-
ing structures of all types. Such maps usually are produced on the scale of 1:10,000 or
smaller, whereas engineering geological plans, being produced for a particular engineering
Figure 7.30
Proposed location of Mount Pleasant Dam to help protect Ladysmith from flooding, showing the 5-, 20- and 50- year flood
boundaries, Natal, South Africa (after Bell and Mason, 1997).
368
Chapter 7
purpose, have a larger scale. Engineering geological maps may serve a special purpose or
a multipurpose (Anon, 1976). Special-purpose maps provide information on one specific
aspect of engineering geology, for example, the engineering geological conditions at a dam
site or along a routeway or for zoning for land use in urban development. Multipurpose maps
cover various aspects of engineering geology.
Engineering geological maps should be accompanied by cross sections, and explanatory
texts and legends. Detailed engineering geological information can be given, in tabular form,
on the reverse side of the map (Fig. 7.31; Tables 7.7a and b). For example, a table of rock
and soil characteristics summarizing the various rock and soil groups, listing their mode of
occurrence, their thickness, their structure and their hydrogeological and geotechnical prop-
erties, may be provided. More than one map of an area may be required to record all the
information that has been collected during a survey. In such instances a series of overlays or
an atlas of maps can be produced. Preparation of a series of engineering geological maps
can reduce the amount of effort involved in the preliminary stages of a site investigation, and
may indeed allow site investigations to be designed for the most economical confirmation of
the ground conditions.
Geotechnical maps and plans indicate the distribution of units, defined in terms of engineer-
ing properties. For instance, they can be produced in terms of index properties, rock quality
or grade of weathering. A plan for a foundation could be made in terms of design parame-
ters. The unit boundaries then are drawn for changes in the particular property. Frequently,
the boundaries of such units coincide with stratigraphical boundaries. In other instances, as
for example, where rocks are deeply weathered, they may bear no relation to geological
boundaries. Unfortunately, one of the fundamental difficulties in preparing geotechnical maps
arises from the fact that changes in physical properties of rocks and soils frequently are
gradational. As a consequence, regular checking of visual observations by in situ testing or
sampling is essential to produce a map based on engineering properties.
Geographical Information Systems
One means by which the power, potential and flexibility of mapping may be increased is by
developing a geographical information system. Geographical information systems (GIS) rep-
resent a form of technology that is capable of capturing, storing, retrieving, editing, analyzing,
comparing and displaying spatial information. For instance, Star and Estes (1990) indicated
that a geographical information system consists of four fundamental components, namely, data
acquisition and verification, data storage and manipulation, data transformation and analysis,
and data output and presentation. The GIS software is designed to manipulate spatial data in
order to produce maps, tabular reports or data files for interfacing with numerical models.
369
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 7.31
Segment for the engineering geological map for the Hijaz Railway in Jordan (after Briggs, 1987). Engineering geology and
characteristics shown in Table 7.7a and b. With kind permission of the Association of Engineering Geologists.
370
371
Chapter
7
Table 7.7a. Excerpts from the engineering geology table illustrating the variety of materials in the study area for the Hijaz Railway. Symbols
1, 2a, 4a, 4b and 5a are shown in Figure 7.31 (after Briggs, 1987)
Moderate
water supply
Suitability as favourability
Map Geological Map Engineering source of in shallow Topographic
symbol description Distribution segments characteristics material for: aquifers expression
1 Surficial deposits Most common in Present on most Excavation: easy Ballast – 0 Fair to good Generally flat,
undivided, chiefly Saudi Arabia map segments Stability: poor Coarse with seasonal locally steeply
wadi alluvium and and southern Strength: fair aggregate – + fluctuations. dissected
fluvial and marine Jordan Tunnel support: Sand – +++ Coastal
terraces maximum Embankments – 0 areas poor
Riprap –0
2a Basalt lava and Widespread 01, 02, 13, 19, Excavation: Ballast – + Generally poor. Flat to
fragmental rocks. in southern 20 and 28 difficult Coarse Locally fair mountainous.
Commonly Syria. Stability: good aggregate – + to good, Surfaces
scoriaceous Locally Strengh: good Sand – + depending commonly
and/or vesicular elsewhere Tunnel support: Embankments – ++ on interlayering bouldery
moderate Riprap – +
3c Sandstone and Along coastal 26, 27, 28 and 30 Excavation: Ballast – 0 Poor Flat to rolling,
conglomerate with plain between intermediate Coarse locally hilly
limestone and A1 Wajh and Stability: fair aggregate – 0 and dissected
marl. Loosely Yanbu, Saudi Strength: fair Sand – +
cemented.Locally Arabia Tunnel support: Embankments – ++
hard moderate to Riprap – 0
maximum
4a Limestone, chalk, Widespread 02–05 and 29 Excavation: Ballast – 0 Generally poor Hilly, locally
marl, phosphatic in Jordan difficult Coarse rolling or
limestone, Stability: fair to aggregate – + mountainous
subordinate good Sand – 0
phosphate rock Strength: fair to Embankments – +
good Riprap – +
Continued
372 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 7.7a. Excerpts from the engineering geology table illustrating the variety of materials in the study area for the Hijaz Railway.
Symbols 1, 2a, 4a, 4b and 5a are shown in Figure 7.31 (after Briggs, 1987)—cont’d
Moderate
water-supply
Suitability as favourability
Map Geological Map Engineering source of in shallow Topographic
symbol description Distribution segments characteristics material for: aquifers expression
Tunnel support:
moderate to
minimum
4b Dolomite and Central Jordan 02 and 03 Excavation: Ballast – + Generally poor Hilly, locally
dolomitic moderately Coarse mountainous
limestone difficult aggregate – +
interlayered with Stability: fair to Sand – 0
limestone, chalk, good Embankments – ++
and marl Strength: fair to Riprap – +
good
Tunnel support:
moderate to
minimum
5a Sandstone with Widespread 02–05 and 29 Excavation: Ballast – 0 Poor to fair Hilly to
subordinate in Jordan moderately Coarse mountainous
chert and difficult aggregate – 0
dolomite. Stability: fair to Sand – +
Commonly good Embankments – ++
calcareous Strength: good Riprap – 0
Tunnel support:
moderate to
minimum
373
Chapter
7
6b Chiefly Widespread in 10–13, 18–25, Excavation: Ballast – +++ Poor Core of Hijiz
andesite lava Hijaz Mountains 27, 30 and 31 difficult Coarse Mountains.
and fragmental Stability: good aggregate – +++ Relief locally
rocks. Common Strength: good Sand – 0 greater than
medium-grade Tunnel support: Embankments – ++ 2000m
metamorphism, minimum Riprap – +++
greenstone
7b Early and altered Common in 10–13 and 19–31 Excavation: Ballast – + Poor Chiefly
granites, the Hijaz difficult Coarse mountainous.
granodiorite, Mountains Stability: good aggregate – + Mostly more
quartz monzonite. and Strength: good Sand – + resistant than
Includes some southern Tunnel support: Embankments – ++ other intrusive
gneiss Jordan minimum to Riprap – ++ rocks
moderate
374 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 7.7b. Key to the engineering characteristics column (after Briggs, 1987)
Excavation facility Stability of cut slopes Foundation strength Tunnel support requirements
Easy – can be excavated by hand Good – these rocks have been Good – bearing capacity is Minimum – support probably
tools or light power equipment. observed to stand on essentially sufficient for the heaviest required for less than 10%
Some large boulders may require vertical cuts where jointing and classes of construction, of length of bore, except
drilling and blasting for their fracturing are at a minimum. except where located where extensively fractured
removal. Dewatering and bracing However, moderately close on intensely fractured or Moderate – support may be
of deep excavation walls may be jointing or fracturing is jointed zones striking required for as much as
required common, so slopes not parallel to and near 50% of length of bore, more
Moderately easy – probably steeper than 4:1 (vertical: moderate to steep slopes where extensively fractured
rippable by heavy power horizontal) are recommended. Fair – choice of foundation Maximum – support probably
equipment at least to weathered In deep cuts, debris-catching styles is largely dependent required for entire length of
rock – fresh rock interface and benches are recommended on packing of fragments, bore
locally to greater depth Fair – cut slopes ranging from clay content, and relation
Intermediate – probably rippable 2:1 to 1:1 are recommended; to the water table.
by heavy power equipment to flatter where rocks are intensely If content of saturated clay
depths chiefly limited by the jointed or fractured. Rockfall is high, appreciable lateral
manoeuverability of the may be frequent if steeper movement of clay may be
equipment. Hard rock layers cuts are made. Locally, lenses expected under heavy
or zones of hard rock may of harder rock may permit loads. If packing is poor,
require drilling and blasting steeper cuts settling may occur
Moderately difficult – probably Poor – flatter slopes are Poor – foundations set in
require drilling and blasting for recommended. Some deposits underlying bedrock are
most deep excavations, but commonly exhibit a deceptive recommended for heavy
locally may be ripped to depths temporary stability, sometimes construction, with precautions
of several metres standing on vertical or taken to guard against failure
Difficult – probably require drilling near-vertical cuts for periods due to lateral stress
and blasting in most excavations ranging from hours to more
except where extensively than a year
fractured or altered
Table 7.8. Advantages and disadvantages of GIS
Advantages Disadvantages
1. A much larger variety of analysis and techniques are available. 1. A large amount of time is needed for data entry.
Because of the speed of calculation, complex techniques Digitizing is especially time consuming.
requiring a large number of map overlays and table
calculations become feasible.
2. It is possible to improve models by evaluating their results and 2. There is a danger in placing too much emphasis on data
adjusting the input variables. Users can achieve the optimum analysis as such at the expense of data collection and
results by a process of trial and error, running the models manipulation based on professional experience. A large number
several times, whereas it is difficult to use these models of different techniques of analysis are theoretically possible,
even once in the conventional manner. Therefore, more but often the necessary data are missing. In other words,
accurate results can be expected. the tools are available but cannot be used because of the
lack of certainty of input data.
3. In the course of a hazard assessment project, the input
maps derived from field observations can be updated rapidly
when new data are collected. Also, after completion of the
project, the data can be used by others in an effective manner.
375
Chapter
7
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
An important feature of a GIS is the ability to generate new information by the integration of
existing diverse data sets sharing a compatible referencing system. Data can be obtained
from remote sensing imagery, aerial photographs, aeromagnetometry, gravimetry, and
various types of maps. This data is recorded in a systematic manner in a computer database.
Each type of data input refers to the characteristics of recognizable point, linear or spacial
geographical features. Details of the features usually are stored in either vector (points, lines
and polygons) or raster (grid cell) formats. The manipulation and analysis of data allows it to
be combined in various ways to evaluate what will happen in certain situations.
Currently, there are many different geographical information systems available, ranging from
public domain software for PCs to very expensive systems for mainframe computers. Since
most data sets required in environmental or engineering geology data processing are still
relatively small, they can be accommodated readily by inexpensive PC based GIS applica-
tions. The advantages of using GIS compared with conventional spatial analysis techniques
have been reviewed by Burrough (1986) and are summarised in Table 7.8.
An ideal GIS for many engineering geological situations combines conventional GIS procedures
with image processing capabilities and a relational database. Because frequent map overlay-
ing, modelling and integration with scanned aerial photographs and satellite images are
required, a raster system is preferred. The system should be able to perform spatial analysis on
multiple-input maps and connected attribute data tables. Necessary GIS functions include map
overlay, reclassification and a variety of other spatial functions incorporating logical, arithmetic,
conditional and neighbourhood operations. In many cases, modelling requires the iterative
application of similar analyses using different parameters. Consequently, the GIS should allow
for the use of batch files and macros to assist in performing these iterations.
Mejía-Navarro and Gracia (1996) referred to several attempts to use GIS for geological
hazard and vulnerability assessment. These were especially in relation to the assessment of
landslide, seismic and fluvial hazards. They then went on to describe a decision support
system for planning purposes that evaluates a number of variables by use of GIS. This inte-
grated computer support system, termed Integrated Planning Decision Support System
(IPDSS) was designed to assist urban planning by organizing, analyzing, and evaluating
existing or needed spatial data for land-use planning. The system incorporates GIS software
that allows comprehensive modelling capabilities for geological hazards, vulnerability and risk
assessment. The IPDSS uses data on topography, aspect, solid and superficial geology,
structural geology, geomorphology, soil, land cover and use, hydrology and floods, and
historical data on hazards. As a consequence, it has been able to delineate areas of high risk
from those where future urban development could take place safely and is capable of
producing hazards susceptibility maps.
376
Chapter 8
Geology, Planning and Development
Introduction
T
he ultimate objective of planning is to determine a particular course of action.
Although the policy that develops from planning embodies a particular course of
action, planning proposals are often controversial in that they may offend one or more
sections of the community. Hence, in the last analysis, planning policies are the prerogatives
of government since legislation is necessary to put them into effect.
Land-use planning represents an attempt to resolve conflicts between the need to utilize land
and at the same time to protect the environment. Hence, planners have to assess the
advantages, disadvantages, costs and benefits of development. In the first instance, land-use
planning involves the collection and evaluation of relevant data from which plans can be
formulated. The policies that result also have to take account of economic, sociological and
political influences. As far as geology is concerned, sufficient data should be provided to plan-
ners and engineers so that, ideally, they can develop the environment in harmony with
nature. Geological information is required at all levels of planning and development from the
initial identification of a social need to the construction stage. Even after construction, further
involvement may be necessary in the form of advice on hazard monitoring, maintenance or
remedial works.
Over recent years, public concern regarding the alteration and degradation of the environ-
ment has caused governmental and planning authorities to become more aware of the
adverse effects of indiscriminate development. As a result, laws have been passed to help
protect the environment from spoilation. Most policies that deal with land use are concerned
with either those processes that represent threats to life, health or property, including, for
instance, hazardous events; pollution of air or water; the exploitation, protection or conserva-
tion of natural resources; or the restoration of despoiled areas.
Laws are now in force in many countries that require the investigation and evaluation of
the consequences to the environment of the development of large projects. Hence, an
environmental assessment can be defined as an activity designed to identify and predict the
impact on society of legislative proposals, policies, programmes, projects and operational
377
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
procedures, as well as to interpret and communicate information about such impacts.
As such, an environmental assessment is a multidisciplinary process with a social compo-
nent, as well as a technical component. Environmental assessment now forms an estab-
lished part of good development planning and was formulated initially in the United States by
way of the National Environmental Policy Act (1969), which entails the preparation of a formal
statement on the consequences of any major federal activity on the environment. In other
words, an environmental impact assessment is required, and this is accompanied by other
relevant documents that are necessary to the decision making process. An environmental
impact assessment therefore usually involves the description of a proposed scheme, its
impact on the environment, particularly noting any adverse effects and alternatives to the pro-
posed scheme. The aim of the environmental impact process is to improve the effectiveness
of existing planning policy. It should bring together the requirements of development and the
constraints of the environment, so that conflicts are minimized. Thus, the primary purpose of
environmental assessment is to aid decision making by national or local government by pro-
viding objective information relating to the effects on the environment of a project or course
of action. A number of associated objectives follow from this. First, an environmental impact
assessment must provide objective information on which decisions can be made. Therefore,
it involves data collection relevant to environmental impact prediction. The information it con-
tains must be comprehensive so that, after analysis and interpretation, it not only informs but
also helps direct development planning. Environmental assessment must be relevant and
must involve comparative analyses of reasonable alternatives. Plans must be analyzed, so
as to ensure that the benefits of a project are fully appreciated. The negative effects, as well
as the positive ones, of development proposals have to be conveyed to the decision makers.
Solutions should be proposed to any problems that may arise as a result of interactions
between the environment and the project. Geologists are invariably involved in environmen-
tal impact assessments.
Since land use inevitably involves different development of particular areas, some type of land
classification constitutes the basis on which land-use planning is carried out. However, land
should also be graded according to its potential uses and capabilities. In other words, indices
are required to assess the environmental status of natural resources and their potential.
Legget (1987) stressed the importance of geology in planning physical facilities and individ-
ual structures, and in the wise use of land. He pointedly noted the obvious, that land is the
surface expression of underlying geology, and that land use planning can only be done with
satisfaction if there is a proper understanding of the geology concerned. Legget further stated
that the development of land must be planned with the full realization of the natural forces
that have brought it to its present state, taking into account the dynamic character of nature
so that development does not upset the delicate balance any more than is essential. Geology
therefore must be the starting point of all planning.
378
Chapter 8
It therefore is important that geological information should be understood by the planner,
developer and engineer. Hence, various types of maps incorporating geological data are
being produced for planning and development purposes, and may have accompanying
explanatory memoirs (Fig. 8.1; Culshaw et al., 1990). Such maps should be readily under-
standable and provide some indication of those areas where there are least geological
constraints on development, and hence allow their use by the planner or engineer at the
feasibility stage of a project (see Chapter 7).
Reports containing comprehensive suites of maps are now produced that can be used
by local and central planners, and also represent useful sources of information for civil engineers,
Figure 8.1
Ground characteristics for planning and development for part of the Torbay area of south west England (after Culshaw et al., 1990).
379
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
developers, and mineral extraction companies. Such maps should help planners avoid
making poor decisions at an early stage and allow areas to be developed sequentially (e.g.
mineral resources can be developed before an area is built over). In addition, they can facil-
itate the development of a multi-use plan of a particular area and avoid one factor adversely
affecting another. For example, in Britain this began in the early 1980s, following a pilot study
of the Glenrothes area of Fife, Scotland. This study produced 27 separate maps covering
such aspects as stratigraphy and lithology of bedrock, superficial deposits, rockhead con-
tours, engineering properties, mineral resources and workings, groundwater conditions and
landslip potential.
Geological Hazards, Risk Assessment and Planning
Obviously, one of the aspects of planning that intimately involves geology is the control or
reduction of the effects of geological processes or geohazards that work against the interests
of humans. Geological hazards can be responsible for devastating large areas of the land
surface and so can pose serious constraints on development. However, geological processes
such as volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, landslides and floods cause disasters only when
they impinge upon people or their activities. Even so, as the global population increases, the
significance of geohazards is likely to rise. In terms of financial implications, it has been esti-
mated that natural hazards cost the global economy over $50,000 million per year. Two thirds
of this sum is accounted for by damage, and the remainder represents the cost of predicting,
preventing and mitigating against disasters.
Geological hazards vary in their nature and can be complex. One type of hazard, for exam-
ple, an earthquake, can be responsible for the generation of others such as liquefaction of
sandy or silty soils, landslides or tsunamis. Certain hazards such as earthquakes and land-
slides are rapid onset hazards and so give rise to sudden impacts. Others such as soil
erosion and subsidence due to the abstraction of groundwater may take place gradually over
an appreciable period of time. Furthermore, the effects of natural geohazards may be difficult
to separate from those attributable to human influence. In fact, modification of nature by
humans often increases the frequency and severity of natural geohazards, and, at the same
time, these increase the threats to human occupancy.
The development of planning policies for dealing with geohazards requires an assessment
of the severity, extent and frequency of the geohazard in order to evaluate the degree of risk.
The elements at risk are life, property, possessions and the environment. Risk involves quan-
tification of the probability that a hazard will be harmful, and the tolerable degree of risk
depends on what is being risked, life being much more important than property. The risk to soci-
ety can be regarded as the magnitude of a hazard multiplied by the probability of its occurrence.
380
Chapter 8
If there are no mitigation measures, no warning systems and no evacuation plans for
an area that is subjected to a recurring geohazard, then such an area has the highest
vulnerability.
The effects of a disaster may be lessened by reduction of vulnerability. Vulnerability analy-
ses comprising risk identification and evaluation should be carried out in order to make
rational decisions on how best the effects of potentially dangerous events can be reduced or
overcome. Short-term forecasts, a few days ahead of an event, may be possible and com-
plement relief and rehabilitation planning. In addition, it may be possible to reduce the risk of
disaster by a combination of preventative and mitigative measures. To do this successfully,
the patterns of behaviour of the geological phenomena posing the hazards need to be under-
stood and the areas at risk identified. Then, the level of potential risk may be decreased and
the consequences of disastrous events mitigated against. Mitigation measures may be
structural or technological on the one hand or regulatory on the other. In other words, the
risks associated with geological hazards may be reduced by control measures carried out
against the hazard-producing agent; monitoring and warning systems that allow evacuation;
restrictions on development of land; and the use of appropriate building codes together with
structural reinforcement of property.
The net impact of a geohazard can be looked upon in terms of the benefits derived
from inhabiting an area in which the hazard occurs, minus the costs involved in mitigation
measures. The risk to society can be quantified in terms of the number of deaths attributable
to a particular geohazard in a given period of time and the resultant damage to property.
The costs involved can then be compared to the costs of hazard mitigation. Unfortunately,
however, not all risks and benefits are readily amenable to measurement and assessment in
financial terms. Even so, risk assessment is an important objective in decision making by
planners because it involves the vulnerability of people and property on the basis of proba-
bility of occurrence of an event. The aims of risk analysis are to improve the planning
process, as well as to reduce vulnerability and mitigate against damage. An objective assess-
ment of risk is obtained from a statistical assessment of instrumentally obtained data and/or
data gathered from past events. In a conventional statistical assessment, probability
expresses the relative frequency of occurrence of an event, based on data collected from
various sources. A number of computer programs are available to carry out such analyses.
Hazard Maps
Any spacial aspect of hazard can be mapped, provided there is sufficient information on its
distribution. Hence, when hazard and risk assessments are made over a large area, the
results can be expressed in the form of hazard and risk maps. An ideal hazard map should
381
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
provide information relating to the spacial and temporal probabilities of the hazard mapped.
In addition to data gathered from surveys, hazard maps are frequently compiled from histor-
ical data related to past hazards that have occurred in the area concerned. The concept is
based on the view that past hazards provide some guide to the nature of future hazards.
Hazard zoning maps usually provide some indication of the degree of risk involved with a par-
ticular geological hazard. The hazard is often expressed in qualitative terms such as high,
medium and low. These terms, however, must be adequately described so that their mean-
ing is understood. The variation in intensity of a hazard from one location to another can be
depicted by risk mapping. The latter attempts to quantify the hazard in terms of potential vic-
tims or damage. Therefore, risk mapping attempts to estimate the location, probability and
relative severity of probable hazardous events so that potential losses can be estimated, mit-
igated against or avoided. Specific risk zoning maps divide a region into zones indicating
exposure to a specific hazard. For example, a method of mapping areas prone to geological
hazards has been developed that uses map units based primarily on the nature of the poten-
tial hazards associated with them. The resultant maps, together with their explanation, can
be combined with a land-use/geological hazard area matrix to provide some idea of the prob-
lems that may arise in the area represented by the individual map. For example, the landslide
hazard map of the Crested Butte-Gunniston area, Colorado, developed by Soule (1980),
provides an illustration of this method (Fig. 8.2). The map, together with its explanation, are
combined with a land-use/geological hazard area matrix that provides some idea of the engi-
neering problems that may arise in the area. For instance, the matrix indicates the effects of any
changes in slope or the mechanical properties of rocks or soils, and attempts to evaluate the
severity of hazard for various land uses. The map attempts to show the factors within individual
map units that have the most significance as far as potential hazard is concerned. The accom-
panying matrix outlines the problems likely to be encountered as a result of human activity.
Microzonation has been used to depict the spacial variation of risk in relation to particular
areas. Ideally, land-use should adjust to the recommendations suggested by any such micro-
zoning so that the impacts of the geohazard events depicted have a reduced or minimum
influence on people, buildings and infrastructure. Single geohazard–single purpose, single
geohazard–multiple purpose and multiple hazard–multiple purpose maps can be distin-
guished. The first type of map obviously is appropriate where one type of geohazard occurs,
and the effects are relatively straightforward. Single geohazard–multiple purpose maps are
prepared where the geohazard is likely to affect more than one activity and shows the vary-
ing intensity of and the response to the hazard. The most useful map as far as planners are
concerned is the multiple geohazard–multiple purpose map. Such a map can be used for risk
analysis and assessment of the spatial variation in potential loss and damage. Both the
geohazard and the consequences should be quantified, and the relative significance of each
hazard compared. The type and amount of data involved lends itself to processing by a
geographical information system.
382
Chapter 8
Figure 8.2
(a) An example of engineering geological hazard mapping in the Crested Butte-Gunnison area (after Soule, 1980). (b) The
matrix is formatted so as to indicate to the map user that several geological and geology-related factors should be considered
when contemplating the land use in a given type of mapped area. This matrix also can serve to recommend additional types of
engineering geological studies that may be needed for a site. Hence, the map can be used to model or anticipate the kinds of
problems that a land-use planner or land developer may have to overcome before a particular activity is permitted or undertaken.
Natural Geological Hazards and Planning
Volcanic Activity
Volcanic eruptions and other manifestations of volcanic activity are variable in type, magnitude,
duration and significance as a geohazard. Most volcanism is associated with the boundariesof
the crustal plates of the Earth, and the activity produced by a volcano varies according to the
383
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.2, cont’d
type of plate boundary. Generally, the activity associated with diverging plate boundaries
entails a relatively gentle upwelling of lava. Since the lava has low viscosity, the eruptions
tend to be non-violent in nature, although large quantities of ash and lava may be thrown into
the air. Furthermore, the lava may flow large distances before it cools. In contrast to this, the
activity associated with converging plate boundaries tends to be explosive in nature. Owing
to the high viscosity of the lava, volcanic vents can become blocked so that subterranian
pressures build up. The sudden release of these pressures during an eruption can give rise
384
Chapter 8
to nueés ardentes, the ejection of large quantities of material to great heights and localized
seismicity.
In any assessment of risk due to volcanic activity, the number of lives at stake, the capital
value of the property and the productive capacity of the area concerned have to be taken
into account. Evacuation from danger areas is possible if enough time is available.
However, the vulnerability of property is frequently close to 100% in the case of most
violent volcanic eruptions. Risk is a complex function of the probability of eruptions of
various intensities at a given volcano and of the location of the site in question with respect
to the volcano.
The most dangerous volcanic phenomena happen very quickly. For instance, the time inter-
val between the beginning of an eruption and the appearance of the first nuées ardentes may
be only a matter of hours. Fortunately, such events usually are preceded by visible signs of
eruption. No volcanic catastrophes have occurred at the very start of an eruption.
Consequently, this affords a certain length of time to take evasive measures. Even so,
because less than one out of several hundred eruptions proves dangerous for a neighbour-
ing population, complete evacuation, presuming that an accurate prediction of an event could
be made, would be unlikely to take place before an eruption becomes alarming.
Baker (1979) estimated that the active life span of most volcanoes probably is between one
and two million years. Since the activity frequently follows a broadly cyclical pattern, some
benefit in terms of hazard assessment may accrue from the determination of the recurrence
interval of particular types of eruption, the distribution of the resulting deposits, the magnitude
of events and the recognition of any short-term patterns of activity. For instance, according
to Booth (1979), four categories of hazard have been distinguished in Italy:
1. Very high frequency events with mean recurrence interval, (MRI), of less than two
years. The area affected by such events is usually less than 1 km2.
2. High frequency events with MRI values of 2 to 200 years. In this category,
damage may extend up to 10 km2.
3. Low frequency events with MRI values 200 to 2000 years. Spacial damage may
cover over 1000 km2.
4. Very low frequency events that are associated with the most destructive erup-
tions and have MRI values in excess of 2000 years. The area affected may be
greater than 10,000 km2.
The return periods of particular types of activity of individual volcanoes or centres of volcanic
activity can be obtained by thorough stratigraphical study and dating of the associated
deposits so as to reconstruct past events. Used in conjunction with any available historical
385
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
records, these data form the basis for assessing the degree of risk involved. However, it is
unlikely that such studies could ever be refined sufficiently for the time of activity to be
predicted to within a decade. Furthermore, because it is unlikely that man will be capable of
significantly influencing the degree of hazard, then the reduction of risk can only be achieved
by reducing exposure of life and property to volcanic hazard.
Booth (1979) divided volcanic hazards into six categories, namely, premonitory earthquakes,
pyroclast falls, pyroclast flows and surges, lava flows, structural collapse, and associated
hazards. Each type represents a specific phase of activity during a major eruptive cycle of a
polygenetic volcano and may occur singly or in combination with other types. Damage result-
ing from volcano-seismic activity is rare, although intensities on the Mercalli scale varying
from VI to IX have been recorded over limited areas.
Hazards associated with volcanic activity also include destructive floods and mudflows
(lahars) caused by sudden melting of snow and ice that cap high volcanoes, by intense down-
falls of rain (vast quantities of steam may be given off during an eruption) or by the rapid col-
lapse of a crater lake. Lahars can prove just as destructive as pyroclastic flows and can travel
appreciable distances in a matter of minutes. Tsunamis generated by explosive eruptions can
prove extremely dangerous. Poisonous gases are a further threat to life. Air blasts, shock
waves and counter blasts are relatively minor hazards, although windows may be broken
several tens of kilometres away from major eruptions.
Detailed geological mapping of the products of volcanic eruption is required in order to
produce maps of volcanic hazard zones (Fig. 8.3). Hazard zoning entails the identifica-
tion of areas liable to be affected adversely by particular types of volcanic eruption during
an episode of activity. Events with a mean recurrence interval of less than 5000 years
should be taken into account in the production of maps of volcanic hazard zoning, and
data on any events that have taken place in the last 50,000 years are probably signifi-
cant. Two types of maps are useful for economic and social planning. One indicates
areas liable to suffer total destruction by lava flows, nueés ardentes and lahars.
The other shows areas likely to be affected temporarily by damaging, but not destructive
phenomena including heavy falls of ash, toxic emissions and the pollution of surface or
underground waters. Examples of volcanic risk maps include expected ash-fall depths,
lava and pyroclastic debris flow paths and the areal extent of lithic missile fallout.
Such maps are needed by local and national governments so that appropriate land uses,
building codes and civil defence responses can be incorporated into the planning
procedures.
Losses caused by volcanic eruptions can be reduced by a combination of prediction,
preparedness and land-use control. Emergency measures include alerting the public to
386
387
Chapter
8
Figure 8.3
(a) Preliminary hazard map of Galunggung volcano, Java, showing the extent of nuee ardente and lahar flow in 1982 (after Suryo and Clarke, 1985). (b) Frequency with which specific areas
on Tenerife have been significantly affected by air-fall deposits during the last 50,000 years (after Booth, 1979). With kind permission of the Geological Society.
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
the hazard, followed by evacuation. Appropriate structural measures for hazard reduction
are not numerous, but include building steeply pitched reinforced roofs that are unlikely to
be damaged by ash fall, and constructing walls and channels to deflect lava flows. Hazard
zoning, insurance, local taxation and evacuation plans are appropriate non-structural
measures to put into effect. Risk management depends on identifying hazard zones and
forecasting eruptions. The levels of risk must be defined and linked to appropriate social
responses. Volcanic zoning is constrained by the fact that the authorities and public are
reluctant to make costly adjustments to a hazard that may have a mean recurrence
interval of 1000 years or more. Data on recurrence intervals are thus critical to zonation.
In the long term, appropriate controls should be placed on land use and the location of
settlements.
Earthquakes
Although earthquakes have been reported from all parts of the world, they are primarily asso-
ciated with the margins of the crustal plates that move with respect to each other. Differential
displacements give rise to elastic strains that eventually exceed the strength of the rocks
involved and fault movement then occurs. The strained rocks rebound along the fault under
the elastic stresses until the strain is partly or wholly dissipated. Initially, movement may
occur over a small area of a fault plane, to be followed later by slippage over a much larger
surface. Such initial movements account for the foreshocks that precede an earthquake.
These are followed by the main movement, but complete stability is not restored
immediately. The shift of rock masses involved in faulting relieves the main stress but
develops new stresses in adjacent areas. Because stress is not relieved evenly everywhere,
minor adjustments may arise along a fault plane and thereby generate aftershocks.
The decrease in strength of the aftershocks is irregular, and occasionally, they may continue
for a year or more.
The epicentre of an earthquake is located on the surface of the Earth immediately above
the focus (i.e. the location of the origin of the earthquake), and shock waves radiate
from the focus in all directions. Earthquake foci are confined to within a limited zone of the
upper Earth, the lower boundary occurring at around 700 km depth from the surface.
No earthquakes are known to have originated below this level. Moreover, earthquakes
rarely originate at the Earth’s surface. In fact, most earthquakes originate within the upper
25 km of the Earth. Because of its significance, the depth of foci has been used as the
basis of a threefold classification of earthquakes; those occurring within the upper
70 km are referred to as shallow, those located between 70 and 300 km as intermediate,
and those between 300 and 700 km as deep. Seventy percent of all earthquakes are of
shallow type.
388
Chapter 8
An earthquake propagates three types of shock waves. The first pulses that are recorded
on a seismograph are the P or compression waves. The next pulses recorded are the S or
shear waves. S waves usually have larger amplitude than the P waves but the latter travel
almost three times as fast as the former. Both P and S waves travel directly from their
source to the surface. The third type of shocks are known as the L waves. These waves
travel from the focus of the earthquake to the epicentre above, and from there they radiate
over the Earth’s surface. P waves are not as destructive as S or L waves. This is because
they have smaller amplitude, and the force their customary vertical motion creates rarely
exceeds the force of gravity. On the other hand, S waves may develop violent tangential
vibrations strong enough to cause great destruction. The intensity of an earthquake
depends on the amplitude and frequency of wave motion. S waves commonly have a higher
frequency than L waves, nevertheless the latter may be more powerful because of their
larger amplitude.
The hazards due to seismicity include the possibility of a structure being severed by fault
displacement but a much more likely event is damage due to shaking (Fig. 8.4).
The destruction wrought by an earthquake depends on many factors. Of prime importance
are the magnitude of the event, its duration and the response of buildings and other
elements of the infrastructure. In addition, other hazards such as landslides, floods, subsi-
dence, tsunamis and secondary earthquakes may be triggered by a seismic event (Khazai
and Sitar, 2004).
The severest earthquakes wreak destruction over areas of 2500 km2 or more, however,
most only affect tens of square kilometres. The strengths of earthquakes may be
expressed in terms of intensity or magnitude. Earthquake intensity scales are a qualitative
expression of the damage caused by an event at a given location. The most widely
accepted intensity scale is the Mercalli scale given in Table 8.1. The magnitude of an earth-
quake is an instrumentally measured quantity and is related to the total amount of elastic
energy released when overstrained rocks suddenly rebound and generate shock waves. It
is expressed on a logarithmic scale. An earthquake of magnitude 2 is the smallest likely to
be felt by humans, and earthquakes of magnitude 5 or less are unlikely to cause damage
to well-constructed buildings. The maximum magnitude of earthquakes is limited by the
amount of strain energy that a rock mass can sustain before failure occurs, hence the
largest tremors have had a magnitude of around 8.9. Such an event causes severe
damage over a wide area.
The magnitude of an earthquake event depends on the length of the fault break and the
amount of displacement that occurs. Generally, movement only occurs on a limited length
of a fault during one event. A magnitude 7 earthquake would be produced if a 150 km
long fault underwent a displacement of about 1.0 m. The length of the fault break during
389
390 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 8.1. Modified Mercalli Scale (1956 version) with Cancani’s equivalent acceleration
Degrees Description Acceleration* (mm s- 2)
I Not felt. Only detected by seismographs. Less than 2.5
II Feeble. Felt by persons at rest, on upper floors, or favourably placed. 2.5 to 5.0
III Slightly felt indoors. Hanging objects swing. Vibration like passing of light 5.0 to 10
trucks. Duration estimated. May not be recognized as earthquake.
IV Moderate. Hanging objects swing. Vibration like passing of heavy trucks, 10 to 25
or sensation or a jolt like a heavy ball striking the walls. Standing motor cars
rock. Windows, dishes, doors rattle. Glasses clink. Crockery clashes. In the
upper range of IV wooden walls and frames creak.
V Rather strong. Felt outdoors, direction estimated. Sleepers wakened. Liquids 25 to 50
disturbed, some spilled. Small unstable objects displaced or upset. Doors swing. Shutters
and pictures move. Pendulum clocks stop, start, change rate.
VI Strong. Felt by all. Many frightened and run outdoors. Persons walk unsteadily. 50 to 100
Windows, dishes, glassware broken. Ornaments, books, etc., fall off shelves.
Pictures fall off walls. Furniture moved or overturned. Weak plaster and
masonry cracked. Small bells ring (church, school). Trees, bushes shaken
visibly or heard to rustle.
VII Very strong. Difficult to stand. Noticed by drivers of motor cars. Hanging 100 to 250
objects quiver. Furniture broken. Damage to masonry D, including cracks.
Weak chimneys broken at roof line. Fall of plaster, loose bricks, stones, tiles,
cornices, also unbraced parapets and architectural ornaments. Some cracks in
masonry C. Waves on ponds, water turbid with mud. Small slides and caving
in along sand or gravel banks. Large bells ring. Concrete irrigation ditches
damaged.
VIII Destructive. Steering of motor cars affected. Damage to masonry C, partial 250 to 500
collapse. Some damage to masonry B, none to masonry A. Fall of stucco
and some masonry walls. Twisting, fall of chimneys, factory stacks, monuments,
towers, elevated tanks. Frame houses moved on foundations if not bolted down,
loose panel walls thrown out. Decayed piling broken off. Branches broken from trees.
Changes in flow or temperature of springs and wells. Cracks in wet ground and on
steep slopes.
391
Chapter
8
IX Ruinous. General panic. Masonry D destroyed, masonry C heavily damaged, 500 to 1000
sometimes with complete collapse, masonry B seriously damaged. General
damage to foundations. Frame structures, if not bolted, shifted off
foundations. Frames cracked, serious damage to reservoirs. Underground
pipes broken. Conspicuous cracks in ground. In alluviated areas, sand and
mud ejected, earthquake fountains, sand craters.
X Disastrous. Most masonry and frame structures destroyed with their 1000 to 2500
foundations. Some well-built wooden structures and bridges destroyed.
Serious damage to dams, dykes, embankments. Large landslides. Water
thrown on banks of canals, rivers, lakes, etc. Sand and mud shifted
horizontally on beaches and flat land. Rails bent slightly.
XI Very disastrous. Rails bent greatly. Underground pipelines completely 2500 to 5000
out of service.
XII Catastrophic. Damage nearly total. Large rock masses displaced. Lines of Over 5000
sight and level distorted. Objects thrown into the air.
Types of masonry used in USA: Masonry A: good workmanship, mortar and design, reinforced laterally and bound together by using steel, concrete, etc.,
designed to resist lateral forces. Masonry B: good workmanship and mortar, reinforced but not designed to resistance of lateral forces. Masonry C: ordi-
nary workmanship and mortar, no extreme weaknesses like failing to tie in at corners, but neither reinforced nor designed against horizontal forces.
Masonry D: weak materials such as adobe, poor mortar, low standards of workmanship, weak horizontally.
*These are not peak accelerations as instrumentally recorded.
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.4
Subsidence of Government Hill School, Anchorage, Alaska, after the earthquake of 1964. Soils failed and moved downslope,
leaving part of the school on unmoved ground, while dropping the rest into a graben.
a particular earthquake is normally only a fraction of the true length of the fault. Individual
fault breaks during simple earthquakes have ranged in length from less than a kilometre
to several hundred kilometres. What is more, fault breaks do not only occur in association
with large and infrequent earthquakes but also in association with small shocks and
continuous slow slippage, known as fault creep. Fault creep may amount to several
millimetres per year and progressively deforms buildings located across such faults
(Doolin et al., 2005).
There is little information available on the frequency of breaking along active faults. All that
can be said is that some master faults have suffered repeated movements; in some cases,
it has recurred in less than 100 years. By contrast, much longer intervals, totalling many
thousands of years, have occurred between successive breaks. Therefore, because move-
ment has not been recorded in association with a particular fault in an active area, it cannot
be concluded that the fault is inactive.
Many seismologists believe that the duration of an earthquake is the most important factor as
far as damage or failure of structures, soils and slopes are concerned. Buildings may remain
392
Chapter 8
standing in earthquakes that last 30 s, whereas strong motions continuing for 100 s would
bring about their collapse. For example, the duration of the main rupture along the fault
responsible for the Kobe earthquake in Japan (January 1995; M = 7.2) was 11 s. However,
the duration of strong motions was increased in some parts of the city located on soft soils
to as long as 100 s (Esper and Tachibana, 1998). What is important in hazard assessment
is the prediction of the duration of seismic shaking above a critical ground acceleration
threshold. The magnitude of an earthquake affects the duration much more than it affects
the maximum acceleration, since the larger the magnitude, the greater the length of the
ruptured fault. Hence, the more extended is the area from which seismic waves
are emitted. With increasing distance from a fault, the duration of shaking is longer but
the intensity of shaking is less, the higher frequency waves being attenuated more than the
lower ones.
The physical properties of the soils and rocks through which seismic waves travel, as well as
the geological structure, also influence surface ground motion. For example, if a wave trav-
erses vertically through granite overlain by a thick uniform deposit of alluvium, then the ampli-
tude of the wave at the surface should theoretically be double that at the alluvium–granite
contact. Maximum acceleration within an earthquake source area may exceed 2 g for com-
petent bedrock. On the other hand, normally consolidated clays with low plasticity are
incapable of transmitting accelerations greater than 0.1 to 0.15 g to the surface. Clays with
high plasticity allow accelerations of 0.25 to 0.35 g to pass through. Saturated sandy clays
and medium dense sands may transmit 50 to 60% g, and in clean gravel and dry dense sand,
accelerations may reach much higher values.
The response of structures on different foundation materials has proved surprisingly
varied. In general, structures not specifically designed for earthquake loadings have fared
far worse on soft saturated alluvium than on hard rock. This is because motions and accel-
erations are much greater in deep alluvium than in rock. By contrast, a rigid building may
suffer less on alluvium than on rock. The explanation is attributable to the alluvium having
a cushioning effect, and the motion may be changed to a gentle rocking. This is easier on
such a building than the direct effect of earthquake motions experienced on harder ground.
Nonetheless, alluvial ground beneath any kind of poorly constructed structure facilitates
its destruction.
Ground vibrations often lead to the consolidation of sandy soils and associated settlement of
the ground surface. Loosely packed saturated sands and silts tend to liquify, thus losing their
bearing capacity (Fig. 8.5). Bray et al. (2004) described the liquefaction of soils after the
Koccaeli earthquake at Adapzari, Turkey, in 1999, when hundreds of structures settled,
slid, tilted and collapsed. If liquefaction occurs in a sloping soil mass, the entire mass begins to
move as a flow slide. Such slides develop in loose saturated silts and sands during earthquakes.
393
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.5
Collapsed building in the Marina District of San Francisco, October 1989, as a result of the Loma Prieta earthquake. The ground floor
of this three-storey building failed, and the second floor collapsed when the silty ground was liquefied, leaving only the third storey.
Loose saturated silts and sands often occur as thin layers underlying firmer materials. In such
instances, liquefaction of the silt or sand during an earthquake may cause the overlying mate-
rial to slide over the liquefied layer. Structures on the main slide are frequently moved with-
out suffering damage. However, a graben-like feature often forms at the head of the slide,
and buildings located in this area are subjected to large differential settlements and are often
destroyed. Buildings near the toe of the slide are commonly heaved upwards or are pushed
over by the lateral thrust.
Clay soils do not undergo liquefaction when subjected to earthquake activity. However, large
deformations can develop under repeated cycles of loading, although the peak strength
remains about the same. Nonetheless, these deformations can reach the point where, for all
practical purposes, the soil has failed. Major slides can result from failure in deposits of clay.
Details about the occurrence, magnitude and effects of earthquakes through time can be
obtained by carrying out long-term seismic monitoring. In the absence of suitable instrumen-
tal data, the seismic history of an area may be established by interpretation of historical,
archaeological and geological evidence.
394
Chapter 8
In earthquake prone areas, any decision making relating to urban and regional planning,
or for earthquake resistant design, must be based on information concerning the charac-
teristics of probable future earthquakes. However, the lack of reliable data to be used for
design purposes has been a cause for concern in engineering seismology. Hence, the
engineer may on occasions accept an element of risk above what would otherwise be
considered normal. This risk, under certain conditions, may prove economically
acceptable for structures of relatively short life. However, this is not acceptable for certain
structures whose failure or damage during an earthquake may lead to disaster. A consid-
erable amount of informed judgement and technical evaluation is needed to determine
what is an acceptable risk for a given project, and caution is required in the selection of
earthquake design parameters. There are a number of methods for selecting appropriate
earthquake design parameters, which may involve estimates of strong ground motions,
but all of them depend on the quality of the input data. The estimation of the maximum
probable earthquake ground motion, and when and where it will occur is extremely
difficult or impossible to assess.
Seismic zoning and micro-zoning provide a means of regional and local planning in rela-
tion to the reduction of seismic hazard, as well as being used in terms of earthquake-
resistant design. While seismic zoning takes into account the distribution of earthquake
hazard within a region, seismic micro-zoning defines the distribution of earthquake risk in
each seismic zone. Seismic evidence obtained instrumentally and from the historical
record can be used to produce maps of seismic zoning (Fig. 8.6). Maximum hazard levels
can be based on the assumption that future earthquakes will occur with the same maxi-
mum magnitudes and intensities recorded at a given location as in the past. Hence, seis-
mic zoning provides a broad picture of the earthquake hazard that can occur in seismic
regions and so has led to a reduction of earthquake risk. Detailed seismic micro-zoning
maps should take account of local geological characteristics, as well as the differences in
the spectrum of seismic vibrations and the probability of the occurrence of earthquakes of
various intensities.
Most studies of the distribution of damage attributable to earthquakes indicate that areas of
severe damage are highly localized and that the degree of damage can change abruptly over
short distances. These differences are frequently due to changes in soil conditions or local
geology. Such behaviour has an important bearing on seismic micro-zoning. Hence, seismic
micro-zoning maps can be used for detailed land-use planning and for insurance risk evalu-
ation. These maps obviously are most detailed and more accurate where earthquakes have
occurred quite frequently and the local variations in intensity have been recorded. A map of
micro-seismic zoning for Los Angeles County is shown in Figure 8.7. It distinguishes three
zones of ground response, active faults likely to give rise to ground rupture and areas of
potential landslide and liquefaction risk.
395
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.6
Probabilistic representation of seismic hazard in the United States. Shaded areas give a probabilistic horizontal acceleration of
the ground that, with a 90% probability, is not likely to be exceeded in 50 years (Algermissen and Perkins, 1976).
Landslides and slope movements
Landslide hazard refers to the probalility of a landslide of a given size occurring within a spec-
ified period of time within a particular area. Most landslides occur in areas previously affected
by instability, and few occur without prior warning. Hence, it is important to carry out careful
surveys of areas that appear potentially unstable. The associated risk relates to the loss of
lives or damage to property. Consequently, landslide hazard has to be assessed before land-
slide risk can be estimated (Ko Ko et al., 2003).
Generally, the purpose of mapping landslide hazards is to locate problem areas and to help
understand why, when and where landslides are likely to occur. Most landslide investigations
are local and site specific in character, being concerned with establishing the nature and
degree of stability of a certain slope or slope failure or all of these (Whitworth et al., 2005).
Landslides should be classified as active or inactive, historical data being of importance, as
well as recent evidence of movement and freshness of form (Hack et al., 2003). Such
investigations involve desk studies; geomorphological mapping from aerial photographs or
396
Chapter 8
Figure 8.7
Microseismic zoning map of Los Angeles County (courtesy of Los Angeles County Planning Department).
satellite imagery, as well as mapping in the field; subsurface investigation by trenches, pits
or boreholes; sampling and testing, especially of slip surface material; monitoring of surface
movements; monitoring pore water pressures with piezometers; and analysis of the data
obtained. Digitization of data from aerial photographs or remote sensing imagery enables this
to be handled in geographical information systems through which the landslide controlling
factors can be evaluated. There are a number of data sources from which background
information may be obtained. These include reports, records, papers, topographical and
geological maps, and aerial photographs and remote sensing imagery. Field investigation,
monitoring, sampling and laboratory testing may provide more accurate and therefore more
valuable data (Vandwater et al., 2005). Many landslide maps only show the hazards known
397
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
at a particular time, whereas others provide an indication of the possibility of landslide occur-
rence (Fig. 8.8). The latter are landslide susceptibility maps and involve some estimation of
relative risk (Van Westen et al., 2003).
Effective landslide hazard management has done much to reduce economic and social losses
due to slope failure by avoiding the hazards or by reducing the damage potential (Schuster,
1992). This has been accomplished by prohibition, restrictions or regulations placed on develop-
ment in landslide-prone areas; application of excavation grading, landscaping and construction
codes; use of remedial measures to prevent or control slope failures; and landslide warning sys-
tems. These measures may be used in a variety of combinations to help solve both existing and
potential landslide problems. They are generally applicable to flows, slides and falls. Recurrent
damage from landslides can be avoided by permanently evacuating areas that continue to expe-
rience slope failures. Structures may be removed or converted to a use that is less vulnerable to
landslide damage. Various types of land-use and land-development regulations can be used to
reduce landslide hazards. They are often the most economical and most effective means avail-
able to a local government. Landslide-prone areas can be used as open spaces or the density
of development can be kept to a minimum to reduce the potential for damage. Zoning and sub-
division regulations, as well as moratoriums on rebuilding, can be used to meet these objectives.
As the same preventative or corrective work cannot always be applied to different types of
slides, it is important to identify the type of slide that is likely to take place or that has taken
place. Also, it is important to bear in mind that landslides may change in character and that
they are usually complex. When it comes to the correction of a landslide, as opposed to its
prevention, since the limits and extent of the slide are generally well defined, the seriousness
of the problem can be assessed. In such instances, consideration must be given to the sta-
bility of the area immediately adjoining the slide. Obviously, any corrective treatment must not
adversely affect the stability of the area about the slide.
If landslides are to be prevented, then areas of potential landsliding must be identified, as
must their type and possible amount of movement. Then, if the hazard is sufficiently real, the
engineer can devise a method of preventative treatment. Economic considerations, however,
cannot be disregarded. In this respect, it is seldom economical to design cut slopes suffi-
ciently flat to preclude the possibility of landslides.
Landslide prevention may be brought about by reducing the activating forces, by increasing
the forces resisting movement or by avoiding or eliminating the slide. Reduction of the
activating forces can be accomplished by removing material from that part of the slide that
provides the force that will give rise to movement. Complete excavation of potentially unstable
material from a slope may be feasible; however, there is an upper limit to the amount of mate-
rial that can be removed economically. Although partial removal is suitable for dealing with
398
Chapter 8
Figure 8.8
Landslide susceptibility classification used in the study of San Mateo County, California (after Brabb et al., 1972). With the
permission of the United States Geological Survey.
399
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
most types of mass movement, it is inappropriate for some types. For example, removal of
head has little influence on flows or slab slides. On the other hand, this treatment is suitable
for rotational slips. Slope flattening, however, is rarely applicable to rotational or slab slides.
Slope reduction may be necessary in order to stabilize the toe of a slope and thus prevent
successive undermining with consequent spread of failure upslope. Benching can be used on
steeper slopes. It brings about stability by dividing a slope into segments.
Drainage is the most generally applicable preventative and corrective treatment for slides,
regardless of type. Indeed, drainage is the only economic way of dealing with landslides
involving the movement of several million cubic metres of material. The surface of a landslide
is generally uneven, hummocky and traversed by deep fissures. This is particularly the case
when a slipped area consists of a number of slices. Water collects in depressions and fis-
sures, and pools and boggy areas are formed. In such cases, the first remedial measure to
be carried out is surface drainage (see Chapter 9).
Measures to control rockfall include catch fences, benches, wire mesh and rock traps.
Restraining structures control landslides by increasing the resistance to movement. They
include, for example, retaining walls, reinforced earth structures, shotcrete, cribs, gabions,
buttresses, piling, dowels, rock bolts and rock anchors (see Chapter 9). The following mini-
mum information is required to determine the type and size of a restraining structure:
1. The boundaries and depth of the unstable area, its moisture content and its
relative stability
2. The type of slide that is likely to develop or has occurred
3. The foundation conditions since restraining structures require a satisfactory
anchorage
River Action and Flooding
All rivers form part of a drainage system, the form of which is influenced by rock type and
structure, the nature of the vegetation cover and the climate. An understanding of the
processes that underlie river development forms the basis of proper river management.
Rivers form part of the hydrological cycle in that they carry run-off from precipitation. This run-
off is the surface water that remains after evapotranspiration and infiltration into the ground
have taken place. Some precipitation may be frozen, only to contribute to run-off at some
later time, while any precipitation that has soaked into the ground may reappear as springs
where the water table meets the ground surface. Although, due to intense rainfall or in areas
with few channels, the run-off may occur as a sheet, generally speaking it becomes
400
Chapter 8
concentrated into channels. These become eroded by the flow of water so that they form
valleys (see Chapter 3).
Floods represent one of the commonest types of geological hazards (Fig. 8.9). However, the like-
lihood of flooding is more predictable than some other types of hazards such as earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions and landslides. Most disastrous floods are the results of excessive precipita-
tion or snowmelt, that is, they are due to excessive surface run-off. It usually takes some time to
accumulate enough run-off to cause a major disaster. This lag time is an important parameter in
flood forecasting. Flash floods prove the exception. In most regions, floods occur more frequently
in certain seasons than others. As the volume of water in a river is increased during times of
flood, its erosive power increases accordingly. Hence, the river carries a much higher sediment
load. Deposition of the latter where it is not wanted also represents a problem.
The influence of human activity can bring about changes in drainage basin characteristics,
for example, removal of forest from parts of a river basin can lead to higher peak discharges that
Figure 8.9
Collapse of John Ross Bridge due to flooding of the Tugela River, Natal, South Africa, September 1987.
401
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
generate increased flood hazards. A notable increase in flood hazard can arise as a result of
urbanization, the impervious surfaces created mean that infiltration is reduced, and together
with storm water drains, they give rise to increased run-off. Not only does this produce higher
discharges, but lag-times also are reduced. The problem of flooding is acute where rapid
expansion has led to the development of urban sprawl without proper planning, or worse,
where informal settlements have sprung up.
A flood can be defined in terms of height or stage of water above some given point such as
the banks of a river channel. However, rivers generally are considered in flood when the level
has risen to an extent that damage occurs. The discharge rate provides the basis for most
methods of predicting the magnitude of flooding, the most important factor being the peak dis-
charge that is responsible for maximum inundation. Not only does the size of a flood deter-
mine the depth and area of inundation but it primarily determines the duration of a flood.
These three parameters influence the velocity of flow of flood waters, all four being respon-
sible for the damage potential of a flood. The physical characteristics of a river basin together
with those of the river channel affect the rate at which discharge downstream occurs. The
average time between a rainstorm event and the consequent increase in river flow is referred
to as the lag-time. Lag-time can be measured from the commencement of rainfall to the peak
discharge or from the time when actual flood conditions have been attained (e.g. bankfull dis-
charge) to the peak discharge. This lag-time is an important parameter in flood forecasting.
Calculation of the lag-time, however, is a complicated matter. Nonetheless, once enough
data on rainfall and run-off versus time have been obtained and analysed, an estimate of
where and when flooding will occur along a river system can be made.
Analyses of discharge are related to the recurrence interval to produce a flood frequency
curve (Fig. 8.10). The recurrence interval is the period of years within which a flood of a given
Figure 8.10
Aflood frequency curve.
402
Chapter 8
magnitude or greater occurs and is determined from field measurements at a gauging centre.
It applies to that station only. The flood frequency curve can be used to determine the prob-
ability of the size of discharge that could be expected during any given time interval.
The lower stage of a river, in particular, can be divided into a series of hazard zones based on
flood stages and risk. A number of factors have to be taken into account when evaluating flood
hazard, such as the loss of life and property, erosion and structural damage; disruption of socio-
economic activity including transport and communications; contamination of water, food and
other materials; and damage of agricultural land and loss of livestock. A floodplain management
plan involves the determination of such zones. These are based on the historical evidence
related to flooding that include the magnitude of each flood and the elevation it reached, as well
as the recurrence intervals; the amount of damage involved; the effects of urbanization and any
further development; and an engineering assessment of flood potential. Maps then are pro-
duced from such investigations that, for example, show the zones of most frequent flooding and
the elevation of the flood waters. Kenny (1990) recognized four geomorphological flood hazard
map units in central Arizona, which formed the basis of a flood management plan (Table 8.2).
Flood plain zones can be designated for specific types of land-use. For instance, in the
channel zone, water should be allowed to flow freely without obstruction, for example, bridges
should allow sufficient waterway capacity. Another zone could consist of that area with recur-
rence intervals of 1 to 20 years that could be used for agricultural and recreational purposes.
Buildings would be allowed in the zone encompassing the 20 to 100 year recurrence inter-
val, but they would have to have some form of protection against flooding. However, a line
that is drawn on a map to demarcate a floodplain zone may encourage a false sense of
security and, as a consequence, development in the upslope area may be greater than it
otherwise would. At some point in time, this line is likely to be transgressed, causing more
damage than would have been the case without a floodplain boundary being so defined.
Land-use regulation seeks to obtain the beneficial use of floodplains with minimum flood
damage and minimum expenditure on flood protection. In other words, the purpose of land-
use regulation is to maintain an adequate floodway (i.e. the channel and those adjacent areas
of the floodplain that are necessary for the passage of a given flood discharge) and to regu-
late land-use development alongside it.
Reafforestation of slopes denuded of woodland tends to reduce run-off and thereby lowers
the intensity of flooding. As a consequence, forests are frequently used as a watershed man-
agement technique. They are most effective in relation to small floods where the possibility
exists of reducing flood volumes and delaying flood response. Nonetheless, if the soil is sat-
urated, differences in interception and soil moisture storage capacity due to forest cover will
be ineffective in terms of flood response.
403
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 8.2. Generalized flood hazard zones and management strategies (after Kenny, 1990).
With the kind permission of the Geological Society
Flood hazard zone I(active floodplain area)
Prohibit development (business and residential) within floodplain. Maintain area in
a naturalstate as an open area or for recreational uses only
Flood hazard zone II(Alluvial fans and plains with channels less than a metre deep, bifur-
cating and intricately interconnected systems subject to inundation from overbank flooding)
Flood proofing to reduce or prevent loss to structures is highly recommended. Residential
development densities should be relatively low; development in obvious drainage channels
should be prohibited. Dry stream channels should be maintained in a natural state and/or
the density of native vegetation should be increased to facilitate superior water drainage
retention and infiltration capabilities. Installation of upstream stormwater retention basins
to reduce peak water discharges. Construction should be at the highest local elevation site
where possible
Flood hazard zone III(Dissected upland and lowland slopes; drainage channels where both
erosional and depositional processes are operative along gradients generally less than 5%)
Similar to flood hazard zone II
Roadways that traverse channels should be reinforced to withstand the erosive power
of a channelled stream flow.
Flood hazard zone IV(Steep gradient drainages consisting of incised channels adjacent
to outcrops and mountain fronts characterized by relatively coarse bedload material)
Bridges, roads and culverts should be designed to allow unrestricted flow of boulders and
debris up to a metre or more in diameter. Abandon roadways that presently occupy the
wash flood plains. Restrict residential dwelling to relatively level building sites. Provisions for
subsurface and surface drainage on residential sites should be required. Stormwater retention
basins in relatively confined upstream channels to mitigate against high peak discharges.
Emergency action involves erection of temporary flood defences and possible evacuation.
A flood warning system can be used to alert a community to the danger of flooding. The suc-
cess of such measures depends on the ability to predict floods and the effectiveness of the
warning system. However, widespread use of flood warning is usually only available in highly
sensitive areas. Warning systems often work well in large catchment areas that allow enough
time between the rainfall or snowmelt event and the resultant flood peak to allow evacuation
and any other measures to be put into effect. By contrast, in small tributary areas, especially
those with steep slopes or appreciable urban development, the lag-time may be so short that,
although prompt action may save lives, it is seldom possible to remove or protect property.
No structure of any importance, either in or adjacent to a river, should ever be built without
giving due consideration to the damage it may cause by its influence on flood waters or the
damage to which it may be subjected by those same waters. The maximum flood that any
such structure can safely pass is called the design flood. If a flood of a given magnitude
404
Chapter 8
occurs on average once in 100 years, then there is a 1% chance that such a flood will occur
during any one year. The important factor to be determined for any design flood is not simply
its magnitude but the probability of its occurrence. In other words, is the structure safe against
the 2%, 1% or the 0.1% chance flood or against the maximum flood that may ever be antic-
ipated? Once this has been answered, the magnitude of the flood that may be expected to
occur with that particular average frequency has to be determined.
River control refers to projects designed to hasten the run-off of flood waters or to confine
them within restricted limits, to improve drainage of adjacent lands, to check stream bank ero-
sion or to provide deeper water for navigation. What has to be borne in mind, however, is that
a river in an alluvial channel is changing its position continually due to the hydraulic forces
acting on its banks and bed. As a consequence, any major modifications to the river regime
that are imposed without consideration of the channel will give rise to a prolonged and costly
struggle to maintain the change.
Artificial strengthening and heightening of levees or constructing artificial levees are frequent
measures employed as protection against flooding. Because these confine a river to its chan-
nel, its efficiency is increased. The efficiency of a river is also increased by cutting through
the constricted loops of meanders. River water can be run off into the cut-off channels when
high floods occur. Canalization or straightening of a river can help to regulate flood flow, and
improves the river for navigation (Fig. 8.11). However, canalization in some parts of the world
has only proved a temporary expedient. This is because canalization steepens the channel,
as sinuosity is reduced. This, in turn, increases the velocity of flow and therefore the poten-
tial for erosion. Moreover, the base level for the upper reaches of the river has, in effect, been
lowered, which means that channel incision will begin there. Although the flood and drainage
problems are temporarily solved, the increase in erosion upstream increases sediment load.
This then is deposited in the canalized sections that can lead to a return of the original flood
and drainage problems.
Diversion is another method used to control flooding. This involves opening a new exit for part
of the river water. But any diversion must be designed in such a way that it does not cause
excessive deposition in the main channel, otherwise it defeats its own purpose. If in some
localities, little damage will be done by flooding, then these areas can be inundated during
times of high flood and so act as safety valves.
Channel regulation can be brought about by training walls or dams that are used to deflect a
river into a more desirable alignment or to confine it to lesser widths. Walls and dams
can be used to close secondary channels and thus divert or concentrate a river into a
preferred course. In some cases, ground sills or weirs need to be constructed to prevent unde-
sirable deepening of the bed by erosion. Bank revetment by pavement, rip-rap or protective
405
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.11
Straightening of a small section of the River Nene in Cambridgeshire, England. The river is also being deepened and the banks
protected by the installation of steel sheet piles.
mattresses to retard erosion usually is carried out along with channel regulation, or it may be
undertaken independently for the protection of the land bordering the river (Fig. 8.12).
Control of the higher stretches of a river in those regions prone to soil removal by gullying
and sheet erosion is very important. The removal of the soil mantle means that run-off
becomes increasingly more rapid and consequently the problem of flooding is aggravated.
These problems were tackled in the Tennessee Valley, United States, by establishing a well-
planned system of agriculture so that soil fertility was maintained, and the valley slopes were
reafforested. The control of surface water was thereby made more effective. Gullies were
filled and small dams were constructed across the headstreams of valleys to regulate run-off.
Larger dams were erected across tributary streams to form catchment basins for flood
waters. Finally, large dams were built across the main river to smooth flood flow.
Nonetheless, the construction of a dam across a river can lead to other problems.
It decreases the peak discharge and reduces the quantity of bedload through the river
channel. The width of a river may be reduced downstream of a dam as a response to the
decrease in flood peaks. Moreover, scour normally occurs immediately downstream
of a dam. Removal of the finer fractions of the bed material by scouring action may cause
406
Chapter 8
Figure 8.12
Revetment composed of fascines of willow being placed along the River Ouse, south of King’s Lynn, Lincolnshire, England.
armouring of the channel. Dams can only be effective when the reservoir they impound is not
full. Reservoirs for flood control should be so operated that the capacity required for storing
flood water is available when needed (Bell and Mason, 1997).
River channels may be improved for navigation purposes by dredging. When a river is dredged,
its floor should not be lowered so much that the water level is lowered appreciably. In addition,
the nature of the materials occupying the floor and the banks should be investigated. This
provides data from which the stability of the slopes of the projected new channel can be
estimated and indicates whether blasting is necessary. The rate at which sedimentation takes
place provides some indication of the regularity at which dredging should be carried out.
Marine Action
Waves, acting on beach material, are a varying force. They vary with time and place
due, first, to changes in wind force and direction over a wide area of sea, and second, to
changes in coastal aspects and offshore relief. This variability means that the beach is rarely
in equilibrium with the waves. Such a more or less constant state of disequilibrium occurs
407
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
most frequently where the tidal range is considerable, as waves are continually acting at a
different level on the beach.
The rate at which coastal erosion proceeds is influenced by the nature of the coast itself and
is most rapid where the sea attacks soft unconsolidated sediments (Fig. 8.13). When soft
deposits are being actively eroded, the cliff displays signs of landsliding together with evi-
dence of scouring at its base. For erosion to continue, the debris produced must be removed
by the sea. This usually is accomplished by longshore drift. If, on the other hand, material is
deposited to form extensive beaches and the detritus is reduced to a minimum size, then the
submarine slope becomes very wide. Wave energy is dissipated as the water moves over
such beaches and cliff erosion ceases. A methodology for assessing the rate of recession of
coastal cliffs has been provided by Lee (2005).
Dunes are formed by onshore winds carrying sand-sized material landward from the beach
along low-lying stretches of coast where there is an abundance of sand on the foreshore.
Figure 8.13
Destruction of houses by marine erosion of glacial deposits along the coast of Holderness, East Yorkshire, England.
408
Chapter 8
Dunes act as barriers, energy dissipators and sand reservoirs during storm conditions.
Because dunes provide a natural defence against erosion, once they are breached the
ensuing coastal changes may be long-lasting. In spite of the fact that dunes inhibit erosion,
without beach nourishment they cannot be relied upon to provide protection in the long term
along rapidly eroding shorelines. Beach nourishment widens the beach and maintains the
proper functioning of the beach-dune system during normal and storm conditions.
The amount of longshore drift along a coast is influenced by coastal outline and wavelength.
Short waves can approach the shore at a considerable angle, and generate consistent down-
drift currents. This is particularly the case on straight or gently curving shores and can result
in serious erosion where the supply of beach material reaching the coast from updrift areas is
inadequate. Conversely, long waves suffer appreciable refraction before they reach the coast.
Before any project or beach planning and management scheme can be started, a complete
study of the beach must be made. The preliminary investigation of the area concerned should
first consider the landforms and rock formations along the beach and adjacent rivers, giving
particular attention to their durability and stability. In addition, consideration must be given to
the width, slope, composition and state of accretion or erosion of the beach; the presence of
bluffs, dunes, marshy areas or vegetation in the backshore area; and the presence of beach
structures such as groynes. Estimates of the rates of erosion and the proportion and size of
eroded material contributed to the beach must be made, as well as whether these are influ-
enced by seasonal effects (Martinez et al., 1990). For example, Rosser et al. (2005) described
the use of terrestrial laser scanning to monitor the rate of coastal erosion of cliffs formed in
hard rocks in North Yorkshire, England. The behaviour when weathered of any unconsoli-
dated materials that form the cliffs, together with their slope stability and likelihood of sliding,
has to be taken into account. Samples of the beach and underwater material have to be
collected and analysed for such factors as their particle size distribution and mineral content.
Mechanical analyses may prove useful in helping to determine the amount of material that is
likely to remain on the beach, for beach sand is seldom finer than 0.1 mm in diameter.
The amount of material moving along the shore must be investigated inasmuch as the
effectiveness of the structures erected may depend on the quantity of drift available.
Topographic and hydrographic surveys of an area allow the compilation of maps and charts
from which a study of the changes along a coast may be made. Observations should be
taken of winds, waves and currents, and information gathered on streams that enter the sea
in or near the area concerned. Inlets across a beach need particular evaluation. During
normal times, there may be relatively little longshore drift but if upbeach breakthroughs occur
in a bar off the inlet mouth, then sand is moved downbeach and is subjected to longshore
drift. The contributions made by large streams may vary. For example, material brought down
by large floods may cause a temporary, but nevertheless appreciable, increase in the beach
409
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
width around the mouths of rivers. The effects of any likely changes in sea level also must be
taken into account (Clayton, 1990). The data collected can be used to plan a system of coastal
defences that also should incorporate a scheme of coastal management (French, 2001).
The groyne is the most important structure used to stabilize or increase the width of the
beach by arresting longshore drift (Fig. 8.14). Consequently, they are constructed at right
angles to the shore. Groynes should be approximately 50% longer than the beach on which
they are erected. Standard types usually slope at about the same angle as the beach.
Permeable groynes have openings that increase in size seawards and thereby allow some
drift material to pass through them. The common spacing rule for groynes is to arrange them
at intervals of one to three groyne lengths. The selection of the type of groyne and its spac-
ing depends on the direction and strength of the prevailing or storm waves, the amount and
direction of longshore drift and the relative exposure of the shore. With abundant longshore
drift and relatively mild storm conditions, almost any type of groyne appears satisfactory,
whilst when the longshore drift is lean, the choice is much more difficult. Groynes, however,
reduce the amount of material passing downdrift and can therefore prove detrimental to
those areas of the coastline. Their effect on the whole coastal system therefore should be
considered.
Figure 8.14
Groynes at Eastbourne, south coast of England.
410
Chapter 8
Artificial replenishment of the shore by building beach fills is used either if it is economically
preferable or if artificial barriers fail to defend the shore adequately from erosion. In fact,
beach nourishment represents the only form of coastal protection that does not adversely
affect other sectors of the coast. Unfortunately, it is often difficult to predict how frequently a
beach should be renourished. Ideally, the beach fill used for renourishment should have a
similar particle size distribution as the natural beach material.
Seawalls and bulkheads are protective waterfront structures. The former range from a simple
rip-rap deposit to a regular masonry retaining wall (Fig. 8.15). Bulkheads are vertical walls
either of timber boards or of steel sheet piling. Foundation ground conditions for these
retaining structures must be given careful attention, and due consideration must be given to
the likelihood of scour occurring at the foot of the wall and to changes in beach conditions.
Because walls are impermeable, they can increase the backwash and therefore its erosive
capability.
Offshore breakwaters and jetties are designed to protect inlets and harbours. Breakwaters
disperse the waves of heavy seas, whereas jetties impound longshore drift material up-beach
of the inlet and thereby prevent sanding of the channel they protect. Offshore breakwaters
commonly run parallel to the shore or at slight angles to it, chosen with respect to the direc-
tion that storm waves approach the coast (Fig. 8.16). Although long offshore breakwaters
shelter their leeside, they also cause wave refraction and so may generate currents in oppo-
site directions along the shore towards the centre of the sheltered area with resultant
impounding of sand. Jetties are usually built at right angles to the shore, although their outer
segments may be set at an angle. Two parallel jetties may extend from each side of a river
for some distance out to sea and, because of its confinement, the velocity of river flow is
increased, which in turn lessens the amount of deposition that takes place. Like groynes,
such structures inhibit the downdrift movement of material, and the deprivation of downdrift
beaches of sediment may result in serious erosion.
Obviously, prediction of the magnitude of a storm surge ahead of its arrival can help save
lives. Storm tide warning services have been developed in various parts of the world.
Warnings are usually based on comparisons between predicted and observed levels
at a network of tidal gauges where coastal surges tend to move progressively along the
coast. To a large extent, the adequacy of a coastal flood forecasting and warning
system depends on the accuracy with which the path of the storm responsible can be
determined. Storms can be tracked by satellite, and satellite and ground data can be used
for forecasting.
Protective measures, such as noted above, are not likely to be totally effective against every
storm surge. Nevertheless, flood protection structures are used extensively and often prove
411
412
(a) (b)
Figure 8.15
(a) Rip-rap used as revetment, Freemantle, Western Australia, (b) Asea wall at Runswick Bay, North Yorkshire, England.
Chapter 8
Figure 8.16
Abreakwater formed of tetrapods near Port Elizabeth, South Africa.
substantially effective. Sand dunes and high beaches offer natural protection against floods
and can be maintained by artificial nourishment with sand. Dunes can also be constructed by
tipping and bulldozing sand or by aiding the deposition of sand by the use of screens and
fences. Coastal embankments are usually constructed of local material. Earth embankments
are susceptible to erosion by wave action and if overtopped can be scoured on the landward
side. Slip failures may also occur. Sea walls may be constructed of concrete or sometimes
of steel sheet piling. Permeable sea walls may be formed of rip-rap or concrete tripods.
The roughness of their surfaces reduces swash height and the scouring effect of backwash
on the foreshore. Barrages may be used to shorten the coastline along highly indented
coastlines and at major estuaries. Although expensive, barrages can serve more than one
function, not just flood protection. They may produce hydroelectricity, carry communications
and freshwater lakes can be created behind them. The Delta Scheme in the Netherlands
provides one of the best examples. This was a consequence of the disastrous flooding that
resulted from the storm surge of February 1953. Estuaries that have major ports require
protection against sea flooding. The use of embankments may be out of the question in
urbanized areas as space is not available without expensive compulsory purchase of
waterfront land and barrages with locks would impede sea-going traffic. In such situations,
movable flood barriers may be used that can be emplaced when storm surges threaten.
The Thames barrier in London offers an example (Fig. 8.17).
413
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.17
The Thames barrier, London, England.
In the open ocean, tsunamis normally have a very long wavelength and their amplitude is hardly
noticeable. Successive waves may be from five minutes to an hour apart. They travel at speeds
of around 650 km h- 1. However, their speed is proportional to the depth of water, which means
that in coastal areas the waves slow down and increase in height, rushing onshore as highly
destructive breakers. Waves have been recorded up to nearly 20 m in height above normal sea
level. Large waves are most likely when tsunamis move into narrowing islets. Such waves cause
terrible devastation. For example, if the wave is breaking as it crosses the shore, it can destroy
houses in its path merely by the weight of the water. The subsequent backwash may carry many
buildings out to sea and may remove several metres depth of sand from dune coasts.
Because of development in coastal areas within the last 50 or more years, the damaging
effects of future tsunamis will probably be much more severe than in the past. Hence, it is
increasingly important that the hazard is evaluated accurately and that the potential threat is
estimated correctly. This involves an analysis of the risk for the purpose of planning and put-
ting mitigation measures into place.
Nonetheless, the tsunami hazard is not frequent and, when it does affect a coastal area, its
destructiveness varies both with location and time. Accordingly, an analysis of the historical
414
Chapter 8
record of tsunamis is required in any risk assessment. This involves a study of the seismic-
ity of a region to establish the potential threat from earthquakes of local origin. In addition,
tsunamis generated by distant earthquakes must be evaluated. The data gathered may high-
light spatial differences in the distribution of the destructiveness of tsunamis that may form
the basis for zonation of the hazard. If the historic record provides sufficient data, then it may
be possible to establish the frequency of recurrence of tsunami events, together with the area
that would be inundated by a 50, 100 or even 500 year tsunami event. On the other hand, if
sufficient information is not available, then tsunami modelling may be resorted to using com-
puter models. These provide reasonably accurate predictions of potential tsunami inundation
that can be used in the management of a tsunami hazard. Such models permit the extent of
damage to be estimated and the limits for evacuation to be established. The ultimate aim is
to produce maps that indicate the degree of tsunami risk that, in turn, aids the planning
process, thereby allowing high risk areas to be avoided or used for low intensity development.
Models also facilitate the design of defense works.
Various instruments are used to detect and monitor the passage of tsunamis. These include
sensitive seismographs that can record waves with long period oscillations, pressure recorders
placed on the sea floor in shallow water, and buoys anchored to the sea floor and used to meas-
ure changes in the level of the sea surface. The locations of places along a coast affected by
tsunamis can be hazard mapped that, for example, show the predicted heights of tsunami at a
certain location for given return intervals (e.g. 25, 50 or 100 years). Homes and other buildings
can be removed to higher ground and new construction prohibited in the areas of highest risk.
Resettlement of coastal communities and prohibition of development in high risk areas has
occurred at Hilo, Hawaii. However, the resettlement of all coastal populations away from possi-
ble danger zones is not a feasible economic proposition. Hence, there are occasions when
evacuation is necessary. This depends on estimating just how destructive any tsunami will be
when it arrives on a particular coast. Furthermore, evacuation requires that the warning system
be effective and that there be an adequate transport system to convey the public to safe areas.
Breakwaters, coastal embankments and groves of trees tend to weaken a tsunami wave,
reducing its height and the width of the inundation zone. Sea walls may offer protection
against some tsunamis. Buildings that need to be located at the coast can be constructed
with reinforced concrete frames and elevated on reinforced concrete piles with open spaces
at ground level (e.g. for car parks). Consequently, the tsunami may flow through the ground
floor without adversely affecting the building. Buildings are usually orientated at right angles
to the direction of approach of the waves, that is, perpendicular to the shore. It is, however,
more or less impossible to protect a coastline fully from the destructive effects of tsunamis.
Ninety per cent of destructive tsunamis occur within the Pacific Ocean, averaging more than
two each year. The Pacific Tsunami Warning System, PTWS, is a communications network
415
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
covering all the countries bordering the Pacific Ocean and is designed to give advance warn-
ing of dangerous tsunamis. Clearly, the PTWS cannot provide a warning of an impending
tsunami to those areas that are very close to the earthquake epicentre that is responsible for
the generation of the tsunami. On the other hand, waves generated off the coast of Japan will
take 10 h to reach Hawaii.
Wind Action
In arid regions, because there is little vegetation and the ground surface may be dry,
wind action is much more significant, and sediment yield may be high. By itself, wind can
only remove uncemented rock debris but, once armed with rock particles, the wind
becomes a noteworthy agent of abrasion. The most serious problem attributable to wind
action is soil erosion. This makes the greatest impact in relation to agriculture. Migrating
sand dunes give rise to problems. Hazards such as migrating dunes are frequently made
more acute because of the intervention of man. Commonly, the problems are most
severe on desert margins where rainfall is uncertain, and there may be significant human
pressure on land.
Hazard maps, such as that in Figure 7.29, showing unstable sand dunes and their
migration, have been produced for development purposes in arid regions (Cooke et al.,
1978). Dune characteristics, notably their form and vegetation density, can be related to
their mobility, and these characteristics also can be recognized on aerial photographs.
High angular fresh dunes, lacking vegetation, can be regarded as potentially or
actively mobile. In contrast, broad rounded low, well vegetated dunes appear to pose a
low hazard risk.
The movement of wind-blown material, not always in dune form, often gives rise to problems
in many arid regions as far as settlements and agricultural land are concerned. Sand and
dust storms can reduce visibility, bringing traffic and airports to a halt. During severe sand
storms, the visibility can be reduced to less than 10 m. In addition, dust storms may cause
respiratory problems and even lead to suffocation of animals, disrupt communications and
spread disease by transport of pathogens. The abrasive effect of moving sand is most
notable near the ground (i.e. up to a height of 250 mm). However, over hard man-made
surfaces, the abrasion height may be higher because the velocity of sand movement and
saltation increase. Structures may be pitted, fluted or grooved, depending on their orientation
in relation to the prevailing wind direction. An analysis of meteorological data provides an
indication of the potential of wind to move sand and silt, but the actual patterns of movement
are influenced by topography, mean ground wind speed and turbulence, and the availability
of material.
416
Chapter 8
Movement of sand can bury obstacles in its path such as roads and railways or accumulate
against large structures. Such moving sand necessitates continuous and often costly
maintenance activities. Indeed, areas may be abandoned as a result of sand encroachment
(Fig. 8.18). Stipho (1992) pointed out that only a few centimetres of sand on a road surface
can constitute a major driving hazard. Deep burial of pipelines by sand makes their inspection
and maintenance difficult, and unsupported pipes on active dunes can be left high above the
ground as dunes move on, causing the pipes to move and possibly fracture.
Aerial photographs and remote sensing imagery of the same area and taken at successive
time intervals can be used to study dune movement, rate of land degradation and erodibil-
ity of surfaces (Jones et al., 1986). The recognition of these various features by the use of
aerial photographs should be checked in the field. Field mapping involves the identification
of erosional and depositional evidence of sediment movement, which can provide
useful information on the direction of sand movement but less on dust transport.
For instance, indirect evidence of the wind regime can be derived from trends of active
dunes. As their destabilization by human activity should be avoided, it is important that
dunes be identified and monitored.
Figure 8.18
Orchard partially buried by moving sand, Hebei, Gu’an County, China.
417
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Removal of moving sand can only happen where the quantities of sand involved are small
and so can only apply to small dunes. Accordingly, a means of stabilizing mobile sand must
be employed. One of the best ways to bring this about is by the establishment of a vege-
tative cover. Natural geotextiles can be placed over sand surfaces after seeding, to protect
the seeds, to help retain moisture and to provide organic matter eventually. These geotex-
tiles can contain seeds within them. Chemical sprays have been used to stabilize loose
sand surfaces. Gravel or coarse aggregate can be placed over a sand surface to prevent
its deflation. A minimum particle diameter of around 20 mm is needed for the gravels to
remain unaffected by strong winds. In addition, the gravel layer should be at least 50 mm
in thickness. Windbreaks are frequently used to control wind erosion and, obviously, are
best developed where groundwater is near enough the surface for trees and shrubs to
have access to it. Fences can be used to impound or divert moving sand. Kerr and Nigra
(1952) presented a review of the objectives and methods to control wind-blown sand
(Table 8.3).
Glacial Hazards
Although the potential hazards of glaciers may be appreciable, their impact on man is not
significant since less than 0.1% of the world’s glaciers occur in inhabited areas. Nonetheless,
Reynolds (1992) divided glacial hazards into two groups, that is, those that are a direct action
of ice or snow, such as avalanches, and those that give rise to indirect hazards. The latter
include glacier outbursts and flooding. The time involved in the different types of glacial haz-
ards varies significantly, as can be seen from Table 8.4.
The rapid movement of masses of snow or ice down slopes as avalanches can pose a seri-
ous hazard in many mountain areas. For example, avalanches, particularly when they con-
tain notable amounts of debris, can damage buildings and routeways, and may lead to loss
of life. Two types of avalanches are recognized; firstly, the dry snow or wet snow avalanches.
Slab avalanches represent the second type, and these take place when a slab of cohesive
snow fails. These tend to be the more dangerous type. Avalanche location can often be pre-
dicted from historical evidence relating to previous avalanches combined with topographical
data. As a consequence, hazard maps of avalanche-prone areas can be produced.
Glacier floods result from the sudden release of water that is impounded in, on, under or adja-
cent to a glacier. Glacier outburst and jökulhlaup both refer to a rapid discharge of water,
which is under pressure, from within a glacier. Water pressure may build up within a glacier
to a point where it exceeds the strength of the ice, with the result that the ice is ruptured.
In this way, water drains from water-pockets so that the subglacial drainage is increased and
may be released as a frontal wave many metres in height. The quantity of discharge declines
418
419
Chapter
8
Table 8.3. Objectives and methods of aeolian sand control (after Kerr and Nigra, 1952). With the kind permission of the American
Association of Petroleum Geologists
Objectives
1. The destruction or stabilization of sand accumulations in order to prevent their further migration and encroachment
2. The diversion of wind-blown sand around features requiring protection
3. The direct and permanent stoppage or impounding of sand before the location or object to be protected
4. The rendition of deliberate aid to sand movement in order to avoid deposition over a specific location, especially by augmenting the
saltation coefficient through surface smoothing and obstacle removal
Methods
The above objectives are achieved by the use of one or more types of surface modification
1. Transposing. Removal of material (using anything from shovels to bucket cranes)—rarely economical or successful, and does not nor-
mally feature in long-term plans
2. Trenching. Cutting of transverse or longitudinal trenches across dunes destroys their symmetry and may lead to dune destruction. Excavation
of pits in the lee of sand mounds or on the windward side of features to be protected will provide temporary loci for accumulation
3. Planting of appropriate vegetation is designed to stop or reduce sand movement, bind surface sand, and provide surface protection. Early
stages of control may require planting of sand-stilling plants (e.g. Ammophila arenaria, beach grass), protection of surface (e.g. mulching),
seeding and systematic creation of surface organic matter. Planting is permanent and attractive, but expensive to install and maintain
4. Paving is designed to increase the saltation coefficient of wind-transported material by smoothing or hard-surfacing a relatively level area,
thus promoting sand migration and preventing its accumulation at undesirable sites. Often used to leeward of fencing, where wind is
unladen of sediment and paving prevents its recharge. Paving may be with concrete, asphalt or wind-stable aggregates (e.g. crushed rock)
5. Panelling, in which solid barriers are erected to the windward of areas to be protected, is designed either to stop or to deflect sand
movement (depending largely on the angle of the barrier to wind direction). In general, this method is inadequate, unsatisfactory and
expensive, although it may be suitable for short-term emergency action
6. Fencing. The use of relatively porous barriers to stop or divert sand movement, or to destroy or stabilize dunes. Cheap, portable and
expendable structures are desirable (using, for example, palm fronds or chicken wire)
7. Oiling involves the covering of aeolian material with a suitable oil product (e.g. high-gravity oil) that stabilizes the treated surface and
may destroy dune forms. It is, in many deserts, a quick, cheap and effective method
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 8.4. Types of glacial hazard
Time involved Hazard Description
Hours Glacier outburst Catastrophic discharge of water under pressure
from a glacier
Jökulhlaup Outburst that may be associated with volcanic
activity
Débaˆcle Outburst but from a proglacial lake
Aluvión Catastrophic flood of mud, generally transporting
large boulders
Days–weeks Flood Areal coverage mostly by water
Months–years Glacier surge Rapid increase in rate of glacier flow
Years–decades Glacier Variations in ice front positions due to climatic
fluctuations changes
after the initial surge. Water that is dammed by ice may eventually cause the ice to become
detached from the rock mass on which it rests; the ice then is buoyed up, allowing the water
to drain from the ice-dammed lake. Discharges of several thousand cubic metres per second
have occurred from such lakes and can cause severe damage to any settlements located
downstream. These outbursts often carry huge quantities of debris. Debaˆcles are rapid
discharges of water from proglacial moraine dammed lakes, whereas aluvions involve the
rapid discharge of liquid mud that may contain large boulders. Releases of large quantities of
water on occasions have led to thousands of people being killed.
Glacier fluctuations in which glaciers either advance or retreat occur in response to climatic
changes. The advance of a glacier into a valley can lead to the river that occupies the valley
being dammed with land being inundated as a lake forms. Hence, landuse and routeways
may be affected. Relatively rapid changes in the position of the snout of a glacier are referred
to as surges.
Geological-Related Hazards Induced by Man
Soil Erosion
Loss of soil due to erosion by water or wind is a natural process. Soil erosion removes the
topsoil, which usually contains a varying amount of the organic matter and the finer mineral
fractions in soil that provide nutrient supplies for plant growth. Unfortunately, soil erosion
can be accelerated by the activity of man. It is difficult, however, to separate natural from
man-induced changes in erosion rates.
420
Chapter 8
Soil erosion by water is most active where the rainfall finds it difficult to infiltrate into the
ground so that most of it flows over the surface and, in so doing, removes soil. The intensity
of rainfall is at least as important in terms of soil erosion as the total amount of rainfall and,
as rainfall becomes more seasonal, the total amount of erosion tends to increase. Some
sheet flow can have catastrophic effects. Such conditions are met most frequently in semi-
arid and arid regions. Nevertheless, soil erosion occurs in many different climatic regions
where vegetation has been removed, it being at a maximum when intense rainfall and
the vegetation cover are out of phase, that is, when the surface is bare. For example, notable
soil erosion can occur in humid areas that are seasonally stripped of vegetation for crop
cultivation.
Sheet flow may cover up to 50% of the surface of a slope during heavy rainfall but erosion
does not take place uniformly across a slope. Linear concentrations of flow may occur within
sheet wash. The depth of sheet wash, up to 3 mm, and the velocity of flow are such that
both laminar and turbulent flow take place. Erosion due to turbulent flow only occurs where
flow is confined. The flow elsewhere is laminar and non-erosive. The velocity of sheet flow
ranges between 15 to 300 mm s- 1. Velocities of 160 mm s- 1 are required to erode soil
particles of 0.3 mm diameter, but velocities as low as 20 mm s- 1will keep these particles in
suspension.
Rills and gullies form when the velocity of flow increases to speeds in excess of 300 mm s- 1,
and flow is turbulent. Whether rills or gullies form depends on soil factors, as well as velocity
and depth of water flow. Rills and gullies remove much larger volumes of soil per unit area
than sheet flow. Severe soil erosion, associated with the formation of gullies, can give rise to
mass movements on the steepened slopes at the sides of these gullies.
Generally, an increase of erosion occurs with increasing rainfall, and erosion decreases with
increasing vegetation cover. However, the growth of natural vegetation depends on rainfall,
producing a rather complex variation of erosion with rainfall. Agriculture can make rainfall and
vegetation partially independent of each other. Accordingly, increased erosion resulting from
farming practices depends on the change in vegetation cover, the total rainfall at periods of
low cover and the intensity of rainfall. Semi-arid regions show greater proportionate changes
in erosion rates with rainfall than other environments and are very sensitive to small changes
in climate.
The exhaustion of the organic matter in soil and soil nutrients used by plants is closely allied
to soil erosion. Organic matter in the soil fulfils a similar role to clays in holding water and
inorganic and organic nutrients. Organic matter is also very important in maintaining soil
aggregates and in providing a moist soil that remains highly permeable. High permeability
and aggregate strength minimize the risk of overland flow. Loss of organic matter depends
421
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
largely on the vegetation cover and its management. Partial removal of vegetation or whole-
sale clearance reduces or prevents the addition of plant debris as a source of new organic
material for the soil. Over a period of years, this results in a loss of plant nutrients and in a
“dry” climate there is a significant reduction in soil moisture. The process can turn a semi-arid
area into a desert in less than a decade. This organic depletion leads to lower infiltration
capacity and increased overland flow with consequent erosion on slopes of more than
a few degrees.
As far as water erosion is concerned, conservation is directed mainly at the control of over-
land flow, since rill and gully erosion will be reduced effectively if overland flow is prevented.
There is a critical slope length at which erosion by overland flow is initiated. Hence, if slope
length is reduced, for example, by terraces that follow the contours, then overland flow should
be controlled. Drainage ditches must be incorporated into a terrace system to remove excess
water. Contour farming involves following the contours to plant rows of crops. As with
terraces, this interrupts overland flow and thereby reduces its velocity, and again can help
conserve soil moisture. Gullies can be dealt with in a number of ways. Most frequently, some
attempt is made at revegetating them by grassing or planting trees. Small gullies can be filled
or partially filled, or traps or small dams can be constructed to collect and control movement
of sediment.
Soil or crop management practices include crop rotation where a different crop is grown
on the same area of land in successive years in a four or five year cycle. This avoids
exhausting the soil and can improve the texture of the soil. The use of mulches, that is,
covering the ground with plant residues, affords protection to the soil against raindrop
impact and reduces the effectiveness of overland flow. Reafforestation of slopes,
where possible, also helps to control the flow of water on slopes and reduce the impact of
rainfall.
Wind erosion is most effective in arid and semi-arid regions where the ground surface is rel-
atively dry and vegetation is absent or sparse. The problem is most acute in those regions
where land-use practices are inappropriate and rainfall is unreliable. This means that the
ground surface may be left exposed. Nonetheless, soil erosion by wind is not restricted to dry
lands. It also occurs, though on a smaller scale, in humid areas.
Wind erosion depends on the force that the wind can exert on soil particles. In addition, the
roughness of the surface over which wind blows has an important influence on erosion.
For example, where the surface is rough because of large stones, the wind speed near the
surface is low, and little erosion occurs. By contrast, uncultivated fields are susceptible to wind
erosion, especially when the soil contains appreciable silt-size material. Losses of up to
10 mm a- 1were experienced in the Dustbowl of Kansas in the 1930s.
422
Chapter 8
The redistribution and resorting of particles by wind erosion may have profound effects on the
soils affected, their related microtopography and any agricultural activity associated with
them. The process operates in a variety of natural environments that lack the protective cover
of vegetation. Its human consequences are most serious in agricultural areas that experience
low, variable and unpredictable rainfall; high temperatures and rates of evaporation; high
wind velocity, as in semi-arid areas; as well as some of the more humid regions that experi-
ence periodic droughts. In such areas, the natural process of wind erosion may be acceler-
ated by imprudent agricultural practices leading to soil damage and related problems.
As far as arid and many semi-arid lands are concerned, yields are generally low near desert
margins, so that it is rarely worth spending large sums of money on conservation. It is in these
regions that good management is necessary, and on low slopes it involves controlling yields
at low sustainable levels, and varying production with wet and dry years. On steep slopes or
where there are migrating dunes, vegetation must be established and grazing discouraged.
To say the least, such policies are difficult to put into effect.
The problem of wind erosion can be mitigated against by reducing the velocity of the wind
and/or altering the ground conditions so that particle movement becomes more difficult or
particles are trapped. Windbreaks interrupt the length over which wind blows unimpeded and
thereby reduce the velocity of the wind at the ground surface. The spacing, height, width,
length and shape of windbreaks influence their effectiveness. Field cropping practices may
be simpler and cheaper than windbreaks, and sometimes more effective. The effectiveness
of the protection against wind erosion offered by plant cover is affected by the degree of
ground cover provided and therefore by the height and density of the plant cover. Plants
should cover over 70% of the ground surface to afford adequate protection against erosion.
Vegetative cover helps trap soil particles and is particularly important in terms of reducing the
amount of saltating particles. Mulches may be used to cover the soil and should be applied
at a minimum rate of 0.5 kg m- 2. As well as providing organic matter for the soil, mulches also
trap soil particles and conserve soil moisture.
The assessment of soil erosion hazard is a special form of land resource evaluation, the pur-
pose of which is to identify areas of land where the maximum sustained productivity from a
particular use of land is threatened by excessive loss of soil. Such an assessment subdivides
a region into zones according to the type and degree of erosion hazard. This can be repre-
sented in map form and used as the basis for planning and conservation within a region.
The first types of soil erosion surveys consisted of mapping sheet wash, rills and gullies within
an area, frequently from aerial photographs. Indices such as gully density were used to esti-
mate erosion hazard. Subsequently, sequential surveys of the same area were undertakenin
which mapping, again generally from aerial photographs, was done at regular time intervals.
423
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Hence, changes in those factors responsible for erosion could be evaluated. They also could
be evaluated in relation to other factors such as changing agricultural practices or
land-use. Any data obtained from imagery should be checked and supplemented with extra
data from the field.
Waste Disposal
Many types of waste material are produced by society of which domestic waste, commercial
waste, industrial waste, mining waste and radioactive waste are probably the most notable.
Over and above this, waste can be regarded as non-hazardous and hazardous. Deposited
waste can undergo changes through chemical reactions, resulting in dangerous substances
being developed, thus posing health risks and environmental problems if not managed prop-
erly. Indeed, waste disposal is one of the most expensive environmental problems to deal with.
Dealing with the waste problem is one of the fundamental tasks of environmental protection.
The best method of waste disposal is determined on the basis of the type and amount of
waste on the one hand, and the geological conditions of the waste disposal site on the other.
In terms of locating a site, a desk study is undertaken initially. The primary task of the site
exploration that follows is to determine the geological and hydrogeological conditions. Their
evaluation provides the basis of models used to test the reaction of the system to engineer-
ing activities. Chemical analysis of groundwater, and at times mineralogical analysis of soils
and rocks, may help yield information about their origin and hence about the future develop-
ment of the site.
Although domestic waste is disposed of in a number of ways, quantitatively the most impor-
tant method is placement in a sanitary landfill (Fig. 8.19). Domestic refuse is a heterogeneous
collection of almost anything, much of which is capable of reacting with water to give a liquid
rich in organic matter, mineral salts and bacteria. The organic carbon content is especially
important since this influences the growth potential of pathogenic organisms. Leachate is
formed when rainfall infiltrates a landfill and dissolves the soluble fraction of the waste, as
well as from the soluble products formed as a result of the chemical and biochemical
processes occurring within the decaying wastes (Loehr and Haikola, 2003). Generally, the
conditions within a landfill are anaerobic, so leachates often contain high concentrations of
dissolved organic substances. Barber (1982) estimated that a small landfill site with an area
of 1 hectare located in southern England could produce up to 8 m3of leachate per day. A site
with an area ten times as large would produce a volume of effluent with approximately the
same biochemical oxygen demand, BOD, per year as a small rural sewage treatment plant.
Hence, the location and management of these sites must be carefully controlled. Clearly, the
production of leachate may represent a health hazard, for example, by polluting a groundwater
424
Chapter 8
Figure 8.19
Cellular construction of a landfill for Kansas City, United States. The most common way of controlling the development of leachate
is to minimize the amount of water infiltrating into a landfill, hence well-designed landfills usually have a cellular structure.
supply that would then require costly treatment prior to use (see Chapter 4). Furthermore,
since it can also threaten the surface water resource potential of a region, an economic
problem of considerable magnitude may be created. Consequently, a physical separation
between waste on the one hand, and ground and surface water on the other, as well as an
effective surface water diversion drainage system are fundamental to the design of a landfill.
Barber (1982) identified three classes of landfill sites based on hydrogeological criteria
(Table 8.5). When assessing the suitability of a site, two of the principal considerations are
the ease with which any pollutant can be transmitted through the substrata and the distance
it is likely to spread from the site. Consequently, the primary and secondary permeabilities of
the formations underlying the landfill area are of major importance. It is unlikely that the first
type of site mentioned in Table 8.5 would be considered suitable. There would also be
grounds for an objection to a landfill site falling within the second category of Table 8.5 if the
site was located within the area of diversion to a water supply well. Generally, the third
category, in which the leachate is contained within the landfill area, is to be preferred.
Since all natural materials possess some degree of permeability, total containment can
only be achieved if an artificial impermeable lining is provided over the bottom of the site.
425
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 8.5. Classification of landfill sites based on their hydrogeology (after Barber, 1982).
With kind permission of the Water Research Council
Designation Description Hydrogeology
Fissured site, or site with Material with well- Rapid movement of leachate via
rapid subsurface liquid developed secondary fissures, joints or through coarse
flow permeability features sediments. Possibility of little
dispersion in the groundwater or
attenuation of pollutants
Natural dilution, Permeable materials with Slow movement of leachate into
dispersion and little or no significant the ground through an unsaturated
attenuation of secondary permeability zone. Dispersion of leachate in the
leachate groundwater; attenuation of
pollutants (sorption,
biodegradation, etc.) probable
Containment of leachate Impermeable deposits Little vertical movement of
such as clays or shales, leachate. Saturated conditions
or sites lined with exist within the base of the landfill
impermeable materials
or membranes
However, there is no guarantee that clay, soil cement, asphalt or plastic lining will
permanently remain impermeable. Thus, the migration of materials from the landfill site into
the substrata will occur eventually, although the length of time before this happens is subject
to uncertainty. In some instances, the delay will be sufficiently long for the polluting potential
of the leachate to be greatly diminished. One of the methods of tackling the problem of
pollution associated with landfills is by dilution and dispersal of the leachate. Otherwise,
leachate can be collected by internal drains within a landfill and conveyed away for treatment.
Selection of a landfill site for a particular waste or a mixture of wastes involves a considera-
tion of economic and social factors as well as the hydrogeological conditions. As far as the
latter are concerned, most argillaceous sedimentary, massive igneous and metamorphic rock
formations have low intrinsic permeability and therefore afford the most protection to water
supply. In contrast, the least protection is provided by rocks intersected by open fissures or
in which solution features are developed. Coarse-grained soils may act as filters leading to
dilution and decontamination. Hence, sites for disposal of domestic refuse can be chosen
where decontamination has the maximum chance of reaching completion and where ground-
water sources are located far enough away to enable dilution to be effective. The position of
the water table is important as it determines whether wet or dry tipping takes place, as is
the thickness of unsaturated material underlying a potential site. Unless waste is inert, wet
tipping should be avoided. The hydraulic gradient determines the direction and velocity of the
flow of leachates when they reach the water table and is also related to both the dilution
that the leachates undergo, and to the points at which flow is discharged. Gray et al. (1974)
426
Chapter 8
recommended that at dry sites, tipping could take place on coarse-grained material that has
a thickness of 15 m or more, while any water wells should be located at least 0.8 km away.
Carbon dioxide and methane are generated by the decomposition of organic materials within
sanitary landfills. However, the amount of gas produced by domestic waste varies apprecia-
bly, and a site investigation is required to determine the amount if such information is
required. Nonetheless, it has been suggested that between 2.2 and 250 l kg- 1 dry weight
(0.0022 to 0.25 m3 kg- 1) may be produced (Oweis and Khera, 1990). Both the gases men-
tioned are toxic, and methane forms a highly explosive mixture with air. Unfortunately, there
are cases on record of explosions occurring in buildings due to the ignition of accumulated
methane derived from the landfills on which they were built. Accordingly, planners of residen-
tial developments should avoid such sites. Proper closure of a landfill site can require gas
management to control methane gas by passive venting, power-operated venting or the use
of an impermeable barrier.
Protection of groundwater from the disposal of toxic waste can be brought about by contain-
ment. A number of containment systems have been developed that isolate wastes and
include compacted clay barriers, slurry trench cut-off walls, geomembrane walls, diaphragm
walls, sheet piling, grout curtains and hydraulic barriers (Mitchell, 1986). A compacted clay
barrier consists of a trench that has been backfilled with clay compacted to give a low
hydraulic conductivity. Slurry trench cut-off walls are narrow trenches filled with soil–bentonite
mixtures that extend downwards into an impermeable layer (Bell et al., 1996). Again, they
have a low hydraulic conductivity. In a geomembrane wall, a U-shaped geomembrane is
placed in a trench and filled with sand so that its shape conforms to that of the trench.
Monitoring wells are placed in the trench so that they can detect and abstract any leakage
from the fill. Diaphragm walls are constructed in a similar manner to slurry trenches but are
an expensive form of containment. Their use is therefore restricted to situations in which high
structural stability is required. If leakage occurs via interlocks in steel sheet pile cut-offs, then
their watertightness is impaired. In such instances, wells may be needed to ensure effective-
ness. Grout curtains may be used in certain situations and are likely to consist of three rows
of holes, the outer rows being grouted first, followed by the inner to seal any voids. Extraction
wells are used to form hydraulic barriers and are located so that the contaminant plume flows
towards them.
When a new site has been chosen, Mitchell (1986) maintained that a properly designed and
constructed liner and cover offer long-term protection for ground and surface water. Clay
liners are suitable for the containment of many wastes because of the low hydraulic conduc-
tivity of clay and its ability to absorb some wastes. They are constructed by compaction in lifts
of about 150 mm thickness. Care must be taken during construction to ensure that the clay
is placed at the specified moisture content and density, and to avoid cracking due to drying
427
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
out during and after construction. Much care also is needed in the construction of geomem-
brane liners so that the seams are properly welded and the geomembrane is not torn.
Composite liners incorporate both clay blankets and geomembranes. Although resistant to
many chemicals, some geomembranes are susceptible to degradation by organic solvents.
Hence, the United States Environmental Protection Agency recommends the use of double
liner systems (Fig. 8.20). An alternative requirement recommended by Gray et al. (1974) was
that a site handling toxic wastes should be underlain by at least 15 m of impermeable strata.
Any well abstracting groundwater for domestic use and confined by such impermeable strata
should be more than 2 km away. Yesilnacar and Cetin (2005) examined the various factors
in southeastern Anatolia, Turkey, that need to be taken account of in site selection for haz-
ardous waste disposal, including geology, topography, land-use, climate and the likelihood of
earthquakes, this being vital for agricultural and water management.
Figure 8.20
Double-liner systems proposed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency guidelines. The leachate collection layer
is also considered to function as the geomembrane protection layer. (a) The flexible membrane liner, FML/composite double
liner. (b) FML/compacted soil double liner (after Mitchell, 1986). With the kind permission of the Geological Society.
428
Chapter 8
Disposal of liquid hazardous waste has been undertaken by injection into deep wells located
in rock below freshwater aquifers, thereby ensuring that pollution of groundwater supplies
does not occur. In such instances, the waste is generally injected into a permeable bed of
rock several hundreds or even thousands of metres below the surface, which is confined by
relatively impervious formations. However, even where geological conditions are favourable
for deep well disposal, the space for waste disposal frequently is restricted and the potential
injection zones are usually occupied by connate water. Accordingly, any potential formation
into which waste can be injected must possess sufficient porosity, permeability, volume and
confinement to guarantee safe injection. Also, the piezometric pressure in the injection zone
influences the rate at which the reservoir can accept liquid waste. A further point to consider
is that induced seismic activity has been associated with the disposal of fluids in deep wells
(see the following text).
Monitoring is especially important in deep well disposal that involves toxic or hazardous
materials. Effective monitoring requires that the geological and hydrogeological conditions be
accurately evaluated and mapped before the disposal programme is started. A system of
observation wells sunk into the subsurface reservoir concerned in the vicinity of the disposal
well allows the movement of waste to be monitored. In addition, shallow wells sunk into fresh
water aquifers permit monitoring of water quality, so that any upward migration of the waste
can be noted readily.
Radioactive waste may be of low or high level. Low level waste contains small amounts of
radioactivity and so does not present a significant environmental hazard if properly dealt with.
Although many would not agree, it would appear that low-level radioactive waste can be dis-
posed of safely by burying in carefully controlled and monitored sites where the hydrological
and geological conditions severely limit the migration of radioactive material.
High level radioactive materials need to be separated from biological systems for hundreds
or even thousands of years before they cease to represent hazards to health. Their disposal
therefore presents one of the most acute problems of the present day (Eriksson, 1989).
The disposal of high level liquid waste can be achieved by solidifying and mixing it with inert
material. It is then placed in steel and concrete containers that may be stored in underground
caverns. Permanent storage in thick impermeable rock formations such as salt, shale, gran-
ite or basalt more than 500 m below the surface is usually regarded as the most feasible
means of disposal (Hunsche and Hampel, 1999). The location should be in geologically
stable areas. Deep structural basins are considered as possible locations for disposal.
The necessary safety of a permanent repository for radioactive wastes has to be demon-
strated by a site analysis that takes account of the site geology, the type of waste and their
interrelationship. The site analysis must assess the thermomechanical load capacity of the
429
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
host rock so that disposal strategies can be determined. It must determine the safe dimen-
sions of an underground chamber and evaluate the barrier systems to be used. According to
the multi-barrier concept, the geological setting for a waste repository must be able to make
an appreciable contribution to the isolation of waste over a long period of time. Hence, the
geological and tectonic stability (e.g. mass movement or earthquakes), the load-bearing
capacity (e.g. settlement or cavern stability), geochemical and hydrogeological development
(e.g. groundwater movement and potential for dissolution of rock) are important aspects of
safety. Subsequently, Langer and Heusermann (2001) emphasized the importance of an
analysis of the geotechnical stability and integrity of a permanent repository since they
represent an important part of any safety assessment of a radioactive waste disposal project.
As such, this requires the development of a geomechnical model.
As far as the disposal of high level radioactive waste in caverns is concerned, thick deposits
of salt have certain advantages. Salt has a high thermal conductivity and will rapidly dissipate
any heat associated with high level nuclear waste; it possesses gamma ray protection similar
to concrete; it undergoes only minor changes when subjected to radioactivity; and it tends not
to provide paths of escape for fluids or gases. The attractive feature of deep salt deposits is
their lack of water and the inability of water from an external source to move through them.
These advantages may be compromised if the salt contains numerous interbedded clay or
mudstone horizons, open cavities containing brine or faults cutting the salt beds and provid-
ing conduits for external water. The solubility of salt requires that unsaturated waters be
totally isolated from underground openings in beds of salt by watertight linings, isolation seals
or cut-offs and/or by collection systems. If suitable precautions are not taken in more soluble
horizons in salt, any dissolution that occurs can lead to the irregular development of a cavern
being excavated. Any water that does accumulate in salt will be a concentrated brine that, no
doubt, will be corrosive to metal canisters. Rock salt is a material that exhibits short and long-
term creep. Hence, caverns in rock salt are subject to convergence as a result of plastic
deformation of the salt. If creep deformation is not restrained or not compensated for by other
means, excessive rock pressures can develop on a lining system, which may approach full
overburden pressure.
Not all shales are suitable for the excavation of underground caverns in that soft compaction
shales present difficulties in terms of wall and roof stability. Caverns may also be subject to
floor heave. Caverns can be excavated in competent cemented shales. Not only do these
possess low permeability, they could also adsorb ions that move through it. A possible dis-
advantage is that if temperatures in a cavern exceeded 100∞C, clay minerals could lose water
and, therefore, shrink. This could lead to the development of fractures.
Granite is less easy to excavate than rock salt or shale but is less likely to suffer problems of
cavern support. It provides a more than adequate shield against radiation and will disperse
430
Chapter 8
any heat produced by radioactive waste. The quantity of groundwater in granite masses is
small and its composition is generally non-corrosive. However, fissure and shear zones do
occur within granites along which copious quantities of groundwater can flow.
The large thicknesses of lava flows in basalt plateaux mean that such successions also could
be considered for disposal sites. As with granite, basalt also can act as a shield against
radiation and can disperse heat. Frequently, the contact between flows is tight and little
pyroclastic material is present. Joints may not be well developed at depth and, strengthwise,
basalt should support a cavern. Such basalt formations can be interrupted by feeder dykes
and sills that may be associated with groundwater. Furthermore, the durability of certain
basalts on exposure may be suspect (Haskins and Bell, 1995).
Waste from mines is deposited on the surface as large heaps that disfigure the landscape.
The configuration of a spoil heap depends on the type of equipment used in its construc-
tion and the sequence of tipping the waste. Spoil heaps associated with coal mines con-
sist of run-of-mine material that reflects the various rock types that are extracted during
mining operations. It contains varying amounts of coal that has not been separated by the
preparation process. Some spoil heaps, especially those with high contents of coal, may
be partially burnt or burning. The spontaneous combustion of carbonaceous material may
be aggravated by the oxidation of pyrite. Spontaneous combustion can give rise to hot
spots in a spoil heap where the temperatures may average around 600∞C but temperatures
as high as 900∞C may occur. Obviously, this can cause difficulties when restoring spoil
heaps. In addition, noxious gases are emitted from burning spoil, including carbon monox-
ide, carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and, less frequently, hydrogen sulphide. Each may be
dangerous if breathed at certain concentrations that may be present at fires on spoil heaps.
Spontaneous combustion may give rise to subsurface cavities in colliery spoil heaps. Burnt
ashes may also cover zones that are red-hot to appreciable depths. When steam comes in
contact with red-hot carbonaceous material, watergas is formed, and when the latter is
mixed with air, over a wide range of concentrations, it becomes potentially explosive.
If a cloud of coal dust is formed near burning spoil when reworking a heap, then this also
can ignite and explode. Compaction, digging out, trenching, injection with non-combustible
material and water, blanketing, and water spraying are methods used to control
spontaneous combustion.
Obviously, an important factor in the construction of a spoil heap is its stability, which includes
its long-term stability. Slips in spoil heaps represent a hazard, one of the most notable being
that which occurred in 1966 at Aberfan, South Wales, resulting in 144 deaths, mainly of
young children. The landslide took place on after heavy rain and, as it moved down-slope, it
turned into a mudflow that flowed at approximately 32 km h- 1, engulfing a school and several
houses (Bishop, 1973).
431
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Old spoil heaps represent the most notable form of dereliction associated with subsurface
mining. They are particularly conspicuous and can be difficult to rehabilitate into the
landscape. These derelict areas need to be restored to sufficiently high standards to create
an acceptable environment. The restoration of such derelict land requires a preliminary
reconnaissance of the site, followed by a site investigation. The investigation provides essen-
tial input for the design of remedial measures. Restoration of a spoil heap is an exercise in
large-scale earthmoving and invariably involves spreading the waste over a larger area so
that gradients on the existing site can be reduced by the transfer of spoil to adjacent land
(Bell, 1996b). Water courses may have to be diverted, as may services, notably roads. After
an old spoil heap has been regraded, the actual surface needs restoring. Where the land is
to be used for amenity or recreational purposes, the soil fertility must be restored so that the
land can be grassed and trees planted. If buildings are to be erected, however, the ground
must be adequately compacted, so that bearing capacities are acceptable and the buildings
are not subjected to adverse settlement.
Tailings are fine-grained slurries that result from crushing rock containing metal ore, from
mineral processing or are produced by the washeries at collieries (Fig. 8.21). The water in
tailings may contain certain chemicals associated with the metal recovery process, such as
cyanide in tailings from gold mines, and heavy metals in tailings from copper-lead-zinc mines.
Figure 8.21
Part of a tailings impoundment for spent Athabasca tar sands, Fort McMurray, Alberta, Canada.
432
Chapter 8
Tailings may also contain sulphide minerals such as pyrite that can give rise to acid mine
drainage. Accordingly, contaminants carried in the tailings represent a source of pollution for
both ground and surface water, as well as soil.
Tailings are deposited as slurry, generally in specially constructed tailings impoundments.
Tailings dams usually consist of raised embankments. The design of tailings dams obviously
must pay due attention to their stability. Failure of a dam can lead to catastrophic
consequences (Chandler and Tosatti, 1995). The most dangerous situation occurs when the
ponded water on the discard increases in size and erodes cracks in the dam to form pipes
that may emerge on the outer slopes of the dam. The failure of a dam may lead to
liquefaction of the tailings (Fourie et al., 2001). What is more, these tailings are commonly
contaminated. For example, the tailings dam at Aznalcollar/Los Frailes mine 45 km west of
Seville, Spain, was breached in 1998, flooding approximately 4600 ha of land along the Ros
Agrio and Guadiamar rivers with around 5.5 million m3 of acidic water and 1.3 x 106 m3 of
heavy metal-bearing tailings (Hudson-Edwards et al., 2003). A catastrophic failure of a tailings
dam used for the disposal of slurry from coal mining occurred at Buffalo Creek, West Virginia,
in 1972. After heavy rain, water overtopped the dam and it failed, releasing 7 x 105 m- 3 of
tailings and water within a few minutes. More than 1500 houses were destroyed and 118
people killed.
The objectives of rehabilitation of tailings impoundments include their long-term mass sta-
bility, long-term stability against erosion, prevention of environmental contamination and
a return of the area to productive use. Normally, when the discharge of tailings comes to
an end, the level of the phreatic surface in the embankment falls as water replenishment
ceases. This results in an enhancement of the stability of embankment slopes. Particular
precautions need to be taken where long-term potential for environmental contamination
exists. For example, as the water level in the impoundment declines, the rate of oxidation
of any pyrite present in the tailings increases, reducing the pH and increasing the
potential for heavy metal contamination. In the case of tailings from uranium mining,
radioactive decay of radium gives rise to radon gas. Radon is a carcinogenic gas.
Diffusion of radon gas does not occur in saturated tailings but, after abandonment, radon
reduction measures may be necessary. In the United States, after a uranium tailings
lagoon is filled it has to be covered with 3 m of earth so that the emission of radon does
not exceed 2pCi m- 2s- 1.
Once the discharge of tailings ceases, the surface of the impoundment is allowed to dry.
Drying of the decant pond may take place by evaporation and/or by drainage to an effluent
plant. Desiccation and consolidation of the slimes may take considerable time. Stabilization
can begin once the surface is firm enough to support equipment and normally involves the
establishment of a vegetative cover.
433
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Subsidence due to Mining
The subsidence effects of mineral extraction are governed by the type of deposit, the
geological conditions, in particular, the nature and structure of the overlying rocks or soils,
the mining methods and any mitigative action taken. In addition to subsidence due
to the removal of support, mining often entails the lowering of groundwater levels that,
since the vertical effective stress is raised, may cause consolidation of overburden.
What is more, dewatering associated with mining in the gold-bearing reefs of the Far
West Rand, South Africa, which underlie dolostone and unconsolidated deposits,
produces differential subsidence over large areas and leads to the formation of sinkholes
(Fig. 8.22).
Many ore deposits are concentrated in veins or ovoid bodies, the mining of which may cause
localized subsidence. Transmission of a ground loss to the surface entails spreading its effect
beyond the edges of the mined area and can indeed fracture the surface. Hence, the removal
of a deep ore body is liable to cause subsidence over a wider area than one of equal thick-
ness at shallow depth, although, in the former case, the lowering of the ground surface will
be less severe.
Figure 8.22
Collapse of the crusher plant into a sinkhole at West Driefontein Mine, Far West Rand, South Africa, with the loss of 29 lives.
434
Chapter 8
The mining method is a very important consideration, not least because of the control it exerts
over the amount of mineral actually extracted during mining operations. The mining of coal
or iron ore prior to the sixteenth century in Britain usually took the form of outcrop workings
or bell-pitting. The latter are shaft-like excavations up to about 12 m deep that extend down
into the mineral seam. Once in the seam, the workings extend outwards for a short distance.
Bell-pitting leaves an area of highly disturbed ground that generally requires treatment or
complete excavation before it is suitable for use for any other purpose.
Later, coal workings were usually undertaken by the pillar and stall method. This method
entails leaving pillars of the mineral in place to support the roof of the workings. The method
also is used to work stratiform deposits including limestone, gypsum, anhydrite, salt and sed-
imentary iron ores (Fig. 8.23). The amount of mineral actually mined depends primarily on
maintaining the stability of the excavation so that large pillars and small stalls are formed in
weaker rock masses. However, in many old coal workings, pillars were robbed prior to aban-
donment of the mine, increasing the possibility of pillar collapse. Slow deterioration and fail-
ure of pillars may take place years after mining operations have ceased. Old pillars at shallow
depth have failed occasionally near faults, and they may fail if they are subjected to the
effects of subsequent longwall mining of coal. The yielding of a large number of pillars can
bring about a shallow broad trough-like subsidence over a large area (Fig. 8.24).
Figure 8.23
Exposed old pillared workings in the Bethaney Falls Limestone, near Kansas City, United States.
435
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.24
Atrough-shaped area of subsidence due to failure of pillars at an abandoned mine, Witbank Coalfield, Mpumalanga Province,
South Africa.
Even if pillars in old shallow workings are relatively stable, the surface can be affected by void
migration. Void migration develops if roof rock falls into the worked-out zones and often rep-
resents the main problem in areas of shallow abandoned mines. It can occur within a few
months or a very long period of years after mining has ceased. The material involved in the
fall bulks, so that migration is eventually arrested, although the bulked material never com-
pletely fills the voids (Fig. 8.25). Nevertheless, the process can, at shallow depth, continue
upwards to the surface, leading to the sudden appearance of a crown hole.
Assessments of mining hazards have usually been on a site basis, regional assessments
being much less common. Nonetheless, regional assessments can offer planners an
overview of the problems involved and can help them avoid imposing unnecessarily rigorous
conditions on developers in areas where they really are not warranted. Hazard maps of areas
of old mine workings frequently recognize safe and unsafe zones. The safe zones are com-
monly defined in terms of the thickness of cover rock, this being regarded as thick enough to
preclude subsidence hazards. Unsafe zones are those in which subsidence events may
occur. Development is prohibited in zones designated unsafe. Intermediate zones may be
recognized between the safe and unsafe zones, where buildings are constructed with rein-
forced foundations or rafts, as an added precaution against unforeseen problems.
436
Chapter 8
Figure 8.25
An example of void migration above a coal seam in an opencast mine, County Durham, England.
Alternatively, the permissible heights of proposed buildings in these zones are restricted in
accordance with depth of mining below the site. These restrictions are progressively relaxed
up to the point where they no longer apply (Stacey and Bell, 1999).
Where a site that is proposed for development is underlain by shallow old mine workings,
there are a number of ways in which the problem can be dealt with. The first and most obvi-
ous method is to locate any proposed structures on sound ground away from old workings or
over workings proved to be stable. Such location is not always possible. If old coal mine work-
ings are at very shallow depth, then it might be feasible, by means of bulk excavation, to
found on the strata beneath. Where the allowable bearing capacity of the foundation materi-
als has been reduced by mining, it may be possible to use a raft. Reinforced bored pile
foundations also have been resorted to in areas of abandoned mine workings. In such
instances, the piles bear on a competent stratum beneath the workings. Where old mine
workings are believed to pose an unacceptable hazard to development and it is not practical
437
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
to use adequate measures in design or found below their level, then the ground itself can be
treated. Such treatment involves filling the voids in order to prevent void migration and/or
pillar collapse. For example, grouting can be undertaken by drilling holes from the surface
into the mine workings and filling the remnant voids with an appropriate grout mix. Steel mesh
reinforcement or geonets have been used in road construction over areas of potential mining
subsidence. If a void should develop under the road, the reinforcing layer is meant to prevent
the road from collapsing into the void.
The mining of coal by longwall methods is a more recent innovation that developed as a
mechanized mining system during the twentieth century. It involves total extraction of a panel
of coal in a seam. The working face is temporarily supported, the support being moved as the
face advances, leaving the roof from which support has been withdrawn to collapse.
The resulting subsidence is largely contemporaneous with mining, producing more or less
direct effects at the surface (Bell, 1988a).
The surface effects of longwall mining include not only lowering but also tilting and both
compressive and tensile ground strains (Fig. 8.26). As longwall mining proceeds, the ground
is subject to tilting accompanied by tension and then compression. Once the subsidence front
Figure 8.26
Curve of subsidence showing tensile and compressive strains, vertical subsidence and tilt, together with angle of draw (not to scale).
438
Chapter 8
has passed by, the ground attains its previous slope and the ground strain returns to zero.
However, permanent ground strains affect the ground above the edges of the extracted
panel. For total mineral extraction and a low depth-to-width extraction ratio, the maximum
amount of subsidence may be up to about 0.9 times the thickness of the seam. Normally,
however, the amount of surface subsidence is significantly less than this amount.
Structural damage is not simply a function of ground strain. The shape, size and form of con-
struction are also important factors. In many instances, subsidence effects have also been
affected by the geological structure, notably the presence of faults and the character of the
rocks and soils above the workings (Bell and Fox, 1988). Fault reactivation associated with
mining can pose a notable problem at times. An extensive review of fault reactivation has
been provided by Donnelly (2005).
The most common method of mitigating longwall subsidence damage is by the introduction
of flexibility into a structure. In flexible design, structural elements deflect according to the
subsidence profile (Anon, 1975b; Anon, 1977b). Flexibility can be achieved by using specially
designed rafts. The use of piled foundations in areas of mining subsidence presents its own
problems, in that pile caps tend to move in a spiral fashion, and each cap moves at a differ-
ent rate and in a different direction according to its position relative to the mining subsidence.
Hence, it is often necessary to allow the structure to move independently of the piles by the
provision of a pin joint or roller bearing at the top of each pile cap. Preventative techniques
can frequently be used to reduce the effects of movements on existing structures. In the case
of long buildings, damage can be reduced by cutting them into smaller, structurally independ-
ent units. Pillars can be left in place to protect the surface structures above them. Maximum
subsidence can also be reduced by packing or stowing the mined-out area.
Subsidence due to the Abstraction of Fluids
Subsidence due to the withdrawal of groundwater has developed with most effect in those
groundwater basins where there is intensive abstraction. Such subsidence is attributed to the
consolidation of sedimentary deposits in which the groundwater is present, consolidation
occurring as a result of increasing effective stress (Bell, 1988b). The total overburden pres-
sure in saturated deposits is borne by their granular structure and the pore water. When
groundwater abstraction leads to a reduction in pore water pressure by draining water from
the pores, this means that there is a gradual transfer of stress from the pore water to the gran-
ular structure. Put another way, the effective weight of the deposits in the dewatered zone
increases since the buoyancy effect of the pore water is removed. For instance, if the water
table is lowered by 1 m, it gives rise to a corresponding increase in average effective over-
burden pressure of 10 kPa. As a result of having to carry this increased load, the granular
439
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
structure may deform in order to adjust to the new stress conditions. In particular, the poros-
ity of the deposits concerned undergoes a reduction in volume, the surface manifestation of
which is subsidence. Subsidence occurs over a longer period of time than that taken for
abstraction. However, in aquifers composed of sand and/or gravel, the consolidation that
takes place due to the increase in effective pressure is more or less immediate.
The amount of subsidence that occurs is governed by the increase in effective pressure, the
thickness and compressibility of the deposits concerned, the length of time over which the
increased loading is applied, and possibly the rate and type of stress applied. For example,
the most noticeable subsidences in the Houston-Galveston region of Texas have occurred
where the declines in head have been largest and where the thickness of clay in the aquifer
system is greatest (Buckley et al., 2003). Furthermore, the ratio between maximum subsidence
and groundwater reservoir consolidation is related to the ratio between the depth of burial and
the lateral extent of the reservoir. In other words, small reservoirs that are deeply buried do not
give rise to noticeable subsidence, even if subjected to considerable consolidation. By contrast,
extremely large underground reservoirs may develop appreciable subsidence.
The rate at which consolidation occurs depends on the rate at which the pore water can drain
from the system that, in turn, is governed by its permeability. For instance, the low permeabil-
ity and high specific storage of aquitards and aquicludes under virgin stress conditions means
that the escape of water and resultant adjustment of pore water pressures is slow and time-
dependent. Consequently, in fine-grained beds, the increase in stress that accompanies the
decline in head becomes effective only as rapidly as the pore water pressures are lowered
toward equilibrium with the pressures in adjacent aquifers. The time required to reach this
stage varies directly according to the specific storage and the square of the thickness of the
zone from which drainage is occurring and inversely according to the vertical permeability of
the aquitard. In fact, it may take months or years for fine-grained beds to adjust to increases
in stress. Moreover, the rate of consolidation of slow-draining aquitards reduces with time and
is usually small after a few years of loading. Maps showing the rates of subsidence, accurate
to a few millimetres per year, can be drawn for periods currently up to a decade long. For
example, Bell et al. (2002) reported using InSAR to investigate land subsidence in the
Las Vegas area, Nevada. They were able to show that subsidence was located within
four basins, each bounded by faults of Quaternary age.
In addition to being the most prominent effect in subsiding groundwater basins, surface fis-
suring and faulting may develop suddenly and therefore pose a greater potential threat to sur-
face structures (Fig. 8.27). In the United States, such fissuring and faulting has occurred,
especially in the San Joaquin Valley, the Houston–Galveston region and in central Arizona.
These fissures, and more particularly the faults, frequently occur along the periphery of
the basin. The faults are high-angled normal faults, with the downthrow on the side towards
440
Chapter 8
Figure 8.27
Earth fissure in south central Arizona. The fissure results from erosional enlargement of tension cracks caused by differential
subsidence. The subsidence is caused by declining groundwater levels. Courtesy of Dr T.L. Holzer.
the centre of the basin. Generally, displacements along the faults are not great, less than a
metre, but movements may continue over a period of years. Holzer et al. (1979) related the
annual variations in the rate of faulting to annual fluctuations in groundwater levels. Such
faults do not extend beneath the zone where stresses due to lowering of the groundwater
level occur.
It is not only falling groundwater levels that cause problems, a rising or high water table can
be equally troublesome. Since the mid-1960s the rate of abstraction from the Chalk and the
Sherwood Sandstone, the two principal aquifers in England, has decreased significantly, so
that water levels are now rising (by as much as 1 m a- 1in places in the Chalk). The potential
consequences of this includes leaks in tunnels and deep basements, reductions in the pile
capacity with the possibility of structural settlement, damage to basement floors and the dis-
ruption of utility conduits. A rise in groundwater level can lead to a rise in the ground
surface, for example, there has been over 20 mm of rebound since 1970 in the Venice area,
441
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
although recovery of the original ground surface level is never complete. The closure of a
mine with the cessation of pumping ultimately results in the flooding of the old workings and
subsequent rebound of groundwater levels until equilibrium is reached (Younger, 2002).
Groundwater rebound may rise and discharge at the surface from fault outcrops, mine
entries, or fractured or permeable strata.
Surface subsidence also occurs in areas where there is intensive abstraction of oil, as well
as natural gas. Again subsidence is attributed to the consolidation of the fluid-bearing forma-
tions that result from the increase in vertical effective stress. In most cases, and particularly
in clayey deposits, the subsidence does not occur simultaneously with the abstraction of fluid.
More than 40 known examples of differential subsidence, horizontal displacement or surface
faulting have been associated with 27 oil and gas fields in California and Texas. The most
spectacular case of subsidence is that of the Wilmington Oilfield near Long Beach, California.
By 1966, after 30 years of production, an elliptical area of more than 75 km2 had subsided
more than 8.8 m. The Groningen Gasfield in the Netherlands has been in production since
1965. Regular precision levelling surveys have been carried out since abstraction of gas
commenced in order to monitor the amount of subsidence occurring at ground surface.
Contour maps showing the amount of subsidence have been produced from this data.
Another method of subsidence monitoring has involved measuring the consolidation of near-
surface sediments by using borehole extensometers.
Deposits that readily go into solution, particularly salt, can be extracted by solution mining.
For example, salt has been obtained by brine pumping in a number of areas in the United
Kingdom, Cheshire being by far the most important (Bell, 1992c). Subsidence due to salt
extraction by wild brine pumping still continues to be an inhibiting factor, on a very much
reduced scale, as far as developments in Cheshire are concerned. Wild brine pumping was
carried out on the major natural brine runs and active subsidence was normally concentrated
at the head and sides of a brine run where freshwater first entered the system. Hence, seri-
ous subsidence occurred at considerable distances, up to 8 km from pumping centres, and
was of unpredictable nature. In addition, tension cracks and small fault scars formed in the
surface tills on the convex flanks of subsidence hollows (Fig. 8.28). Because the exact area
from which salt was extracted was not known, the magnitude of subsidence developed could
not be related to the volume of salt worked. Consequently, there was no accurate means of
predicting the amount of ground movement or strain. Sulphur is mined in Texas and
Louisiana by the Frasch process that involves pumping hot water into the beds of sulphur and
then pumping brine to the surface. Subsidence troughs with associated small faults at the
periphery of the basins have formed.
Poorly drained areas, especially low-lying marshes and swamplands, generally contain
high proportions of organic matter in their associated soils. When such soils are drained,
442
Chapter 8
Figure 8.28
Atension scar produced by wild-brine pumping, Cheshire, England. Note the flash (lake) in the top right-hand corner.
the ground level subsides. The subsidence is not only due to the consolidation that
occurs as a result of the loss of the buoyant force of groundwater but is also attributable
to desiccation and shrinkage associated with drying out in the zone of aeration and
oxidation of the organic material in that zone. Peat deposits have by far the greatest
potential for subsidence when drained (Fig. 8.29). In fact, because peat is highly
porous, with moisture contents that can range up to 2000%, it is by far the most compressible
soil type.
Induced Sinkholes
Many sinkholes are induced by man’s activities, that is, they result from declines in ground-
water level, especially those due to excessive abstraction. For example, Jammal (1986)
recorded that 70 sinkholes appeared in Orange and Seminole counties in central Florida over
a period of 20 years. Most of these developed in those months of the year when rainfall was
least (i.e. April and May) and withdrawal of groundwater was high. Nonetheless, the appear-
ance of a sinkhole at the surface represents a late-stage expression of processes that have
been in operation probably for thousands of years.
443
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 8.29
Subsidence caused by drainage of peat, Benwick, Cambridgeshire, England. Note the house on the right where the ground floor
window is at pavement level, the house next door has been demolished and the others are tilted at various angles.
Most collapses forming sinkholes result from roof failures of cavities in unconsolidated deposits
above karstic limestone (Waltham and Fookes, 2003). These cavities are created when the
unconsolidated deposits move or are eroded downwards into openings in the top of bedrock.
The stability of residual soils that overlie cavernous limestone is a concern during the location
and construction of buildings (Drumm and Yang, 2005). Collapse of bedrock roofs, as com-
pared with the migration of unconsolidated deposits into openings in the top of bedrock, is rare.
Some induced sinkholes develop within hours of the effects of man’s activity being imposed
on the geological and hydrogeological conditions. Several collapse mechanisms have been
proposed and have included the loss of buoyant support to roofs of cavities or caverns in
bedrock previously filled with water; increase in the amplitude of water-level fluctuations;
increases in the velocity of movement of groundwater; and movement of water from the land
surface to openings in underlying bedrock where most recharge had previously been rejected
since the openings were occupied by water.
Dewatering associated with mining in the gold-bearing reefs of the Far West Rand,
South Africa, which underlie dolostone and unconsolidated deposits, has led to the formation of
444
Chapter 8
sinkholes and produced differential subsidence over large areas (Fig. 8.22). Hence, certain
areas became unsafe for occupation. It then became a matter of urgency that the areas that
were subject to the occurrence of sinkholes be delineated. Sinkholes formed concurrently
with the lowering of the water table in areas that formerly, in general, had been free from sink-
holes (De Bruyn and Bell, 2001). A sinkhole develops when the self-supporting arch of
unconsolidated material collapses into a cavity in the dolostone beneath. Initially, the neck of
the cavity was small enough to permit the unconsolidated deposits to bridge across it.
Normally, the cover of unconsolidated material is less than 15 m, otherwise it will choke the
cavity on collapse.
Areas underlain by highly cavernous limestones possess most sinkholes, hence sinkhole
density has proven a useful indicator of potential subsidence. As there is preferential devel-
opment of solution voids along zones of high secondary permeability because these concen-
trate groundwater flow, data on fracture orientation and density, fracture intersection density
and the total length of fractures have been used to model the presence of solution cavities in
limestone. Therefore, the locating of areas of high risk of cavity collapse has been done by
using the intersection of lineaments formed by fracture traces and lineated depressions.
Aerial photographs have proved particularly useful in this context. Brook and Alison (1986)
described the production of subsidence susceptibility maps of a covered karst terrain in
Dougherty County, southwest Georgia. These maps were developed using a geographical
information system that incorporated much of the type of data referred to. The microgravity
technique has been used by Styles et al. (2005) to characterize cavities in karst
terrain. Buttrick et al. (2001) developed a method for assessing the risk of sinkhole hazard in
dolostone areas in South Africa.
Induced Seismicity
Induced seismicity occurs where changes in the local stress conditions brought about by man
give rise to changes in strain and deformation in rock masses, causing movements along dis-
continuities. These movements may be on a microscopic or macroscopic scale. Most events
of this type have been associated with large reservoirs, underground liquid waste disposal,
hydrocarbon extraction, underground mining or large explosions. Such activities through the
single or combined effect of unloading, loading or increased pore pressures in the rock
masses concerned allow the release of stored strain energy. The earthquakes produced tend
to have magnitudes of less than 5, although more serious events have occurred.
For instance, an earthquake of magnitude 6.5 was associated with the Koyna Reservoir in
India and resulted in loss of life and damage to the dam itself. The area in which Koyna
Reservoir is located in characterized by wrench faulting. Evidence suggests that it was
already in a critical state of stress before the dam was constructed, and impounding of the
445
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
reservoir provided the necessary triggering mechanism for movements to occur along the
faults due to the increase in pore water pressure. Induced seismicity in the Denver area of
Colorado was attributed to the disposal of liquid waste down a deep well. Over 700 minor
earthquakes of magnitudes up to 4.3 were recorded. Water injection to enhance the recov-
ery of oil has also led to the occurrence of seismic events.
Seismic emissions may be brought about as a result of the fluid acting as a lubricant in micro-
cracks and fissures on the one hand, and by increasing the pore pressures, thereby reducing
the shear strength of the rock mass on the other. Both may trigger the release of strain energy
from the rocks and facilitate movements along faults. It has been suggested that there is a crit-
ical pore fluid pressure required for earthquake activity to rise above background levels.
Violent rock failures (i.e. rock bursts) are associated with deep mining. The latter causes stress
changes that lead to the sudden release of stored strain energy. In the gold mines of the
Witwatersrand system in South Africa, such release of strain energy is responsible for the gen-
eration of seismic events that range up to magnitudes of around 4 (De Bruyn and Bell, 1997).
The sources of most of the seismic events are located in the rock mass in the immediate vicin-
ity of mining activity. Minor seismicity has also been caused by coal mining. In the latter part of
the 1970s, minor earth tremors were recorded in the neighbourhood of Stoke-on-Trent,
England, and were linked with mining at Hem Heath Colliery (Kusznir et al., 1980). The pres-
ence of old workings in the same area appeared to be an additional causative factor.
Derelict and Contaminated Land
Derelict land can be regarded as land that has been damaged by industrial use or other
means of exploitation to the extent that it has to undergo some form of remedial treatment
before it can be of beneficial use. Such land usually has been abandoned in an unsightly con-
dition and is normally located in urban areas. Not only is derelict land a wasted resource, but
it also has a blighting effect on the surrounding area and can deter new development.
Its rehabilitation is therefore highly desirable, not only by improving the appearance of an
area but also by making a significant contribution to its economy by bringing derelict land
back into worthwhile use. Accordingly, there is both economic and environmental advantage
in the regeneration of derelict land. The use to which derelict land is put should suit the needs
of the surrounding area and be compatible with other forms of land use.
Any project involving the rehabilitation of derelict land requires a feasibility study. This needs
to consider topography and geological conditions, site history, and the local environment and
existing infrastructure. The results of the feasibility study allow an initial assessment
to be made of the possible ways to develop a site. This is followed by a site investigation.
446
Chapter 8
Figure 8.30
Asurvey of derelict land being undertaken in Leeds, England.
The investigation provides essential input data for the design of remedial measures and indi-
cates whether or not demolition debris can be used in the rehabilitation scheme.
Derelict land may present hazards, for example, disposal of industrial wastes may have con-
taminated land, in some cases so badly that earth has to be removed, or the ground may be
severely disturbed by the presence of massive old foundations and subsurface structures
such as tanks, pits and conduits for services. Contaminated land may emit gases or may
represent a fire hazard. Details relating to such hazards should be determined during the site
investigation. Site hazards result in constraints on the freedom of action, necessitate strin-
gent safety requirements, may involve time-consuming and costly working procedures and
affect the type of development. Derelict sites may require varying amounts of filling, levelling
and regrading. As far as fill is concerned, this should be obtained from on site if possible,
otherwise from an area nearby. Once regrading has been completed, the actual surface needs
restoring. This is not so important if the area is to be built over (e.g. if it is to be used for an
industrial estate), as it is if it is to be used for amenity or recreational purposes. In the case
447
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in which buildings are to be erected, however, the ground must be adequately compacted so
that they are not subjected to adverse settlement. On the other hand, where the land is to be
used for amenity or recreational purposes, then soil fertility must be restored so that the land
can be grassed and trees planted.
Some of the worst dereliction has been associated with past mineral workings and mining activ-
ities. The presence of old shafts represents a particular problem (Anon, 1982; Bell, 1988c).
Abandoned quarries, pits and spoil heaps are particularly conspicuous, and can be difficult to
rehabilitate into the landscape. Quarries are often screened from view by planting trees around
them or, where conditions allow, used for waste disposal. Some large, old quarry voids have
been used for storage or for the location of industrial units. In limestone areas in particular, land-
form replication represents the best method of quarry reclamation. Landform replication involves
the construction of landforms and associated habitats similar to those of the surrounding envi-
ronment (Bailey and Gunn, 1991). Restoration blasting along quarry faces can be used to repli-
cate scree slopes and to produce multi-faceted slope sequences. At times, old mineral workings
can be turned into industrial museums, used for storage or become tourist attractions (Fig. 8.31).
The extraction of sand and gravel deposits in low-lying areas along the flanks of rivers fre-
quently means that the workings eventually extend beneath the water table. On rehabilitation,
it is not necessary to fill the flooded pits completely. Partial filling and landscaping can convert
such sites into recreational areas offering such facilities as sailing, fishing and other water
sports. It is necessary to carry out a thorough survey of flooded workings, with soundings being
taken so that accurate plans and sections can be prepared. The resultant report then forms the
basis for the design of the measures involved in rehabilitation (Bell and Genske, 2000).
Opencast working of coal involves excavation to depths of up to around 100 m below the surface.
Working is advanced on a broad front with face lengths of 3 to 5 km not being uncommon.
The material excavated, minus the coal, is used to fill the void. It is placed above ground in
a suitable position in relation to void filling so that later rehandling is minimized. Restoration
can begin before a site is closed, indeed this usually is the more convenient method. Hence,
worked out areas behind the excavation front are filled with rock waste. This means that the
final contours can be designed with less spoil movement than if the two operations were
undertaken separately (Hughes and Clarke, 2003). The restored land is generally used for
agriculture or forestry but it can be used for country parks, golf courses, etc. The water table
at many opencast sites is lowered by pumping in order to provide dry working conditions in
the pit. If a site is to be restored for agricultural use or for forestry, then this takes place with-
out compaction control. However, if a site is to be built over, then settlement is likely to be a
problem without proper compaction. Significant settlements of opencast backfill can occur
when the partially saturated material becomes saturated by rising groundwater after pumping
has ceased (Charles et al., 1993).
448
Chapter 8
Figure 8.31
The Big Hole, Kimberley, South Africa. This famed old diamond working is now a popular tourist attraction.
Land can contain substances that are undesirable or even hazardous as a result of natural
processes, for example, as a result of mineralization. However, most cases of contaminated
land are associated with human activity. In particular, in many of the industrialized countries
of the world, one of the legacies of the past two centuries is that land has been contaminated.
Hence, when such sites are cleared for redevelopment, they can pose problems.
Contaminated land is by no means easy to define but it can be regarded as land that con-
tains substances that, when present in sufficient concentrations, are likely to cause harm,
directly or indirectly, to man, to the environment or to other targets.
Contamination can take many forms and can be variable in nature across a site, and each
site has its own characteristics (Attewell, 1993). In some cases, only a single previous use of
a site may be identified, which has a characteristic pattern of contamination. On the other
hand, some sites have had a number of former uses, especially when industry was established
449
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
on them over a long period of time. In such cases, there may be no particular characteristic
pattern of contamination present. The types of contaminants that may be encountered
include heavy metals, sulphates, asbestos, various organic compounds, toxic and flammable
gases, combustible materials and radioactive materials.
The migration of soil-borne contaminants is associated primarily with groundwater move-
ment, and the effectiveness of groundwater to transport contaminants is dependent mainly
on their solubility. The quality of water can provide an indication of the mobility of contami-
nants and the rate of dispersal. Liquid and gas contaminants, of course, may be mobile.
The first stage in any investigation of a site suspected of being contaminated is a desk study
that provides data for the design of the subsequent ground investigation. The desk study
should identify past and present uses of the site, and the surrounding area, and the potential
for and likely forms of contamination. The objectives of the desk study are to identify any haz-
ards and the primary targets likely to be at risk; to provide data for health and safety precau-
tions for the site exploration; and to identify any other factors that may act as constraints on
development. Hence, the desk study should provide, wherever possible, information on the
layout of the site, including structures below ground; its physical features; the geology and
hydrogeology of the site; the previous history of the site; the nature and quantities of materials
likely to be handled; the processing involved; health and safety records; and methods of
waste disposal. It should allow a preliminary risk assessment to be made. Just as a normal
site investigation, one that is involved with the exploration for contamination needs to deter-
mine the nature of the ground. In addition, it needs to assess the ability of the ground to trans-
mit any contaminants either laterally, or upward by capillary action. Permeability testing is
therefore required. The exploration must also establish the location of any perched water
tables and aquifers, and any linkages between them, as well as determine the chemistry of
the water on site. The exploratory methods used in the site exploration can include manual
excavation, trenching and the use of trial pits, light cable percussion boring, power auger
drilling, rotary drilling, and water and gas surveys (Bell et al., 1996). Sampling procedures are
of particular importance. Digitization of data for the production of various site plans can be
accomplished by a geographical information system.
A wide range of technologies are available for the remediation of contaminated sites, and the
applicability of a particular method depends on the site conditions, the type and extent of con-
tamination, and the extent of remediation required. In some situations, it may be possible to
rely on natural decay or dispersion of the contaminants. Removal of contaminants from a site
for disposal in an approved disposal facility has frequently been used. However, the costs
involved in removal can be extremely high. On-site burial can be carried out by the provision of
an acceptable surface barrier or an approved depth of clean surface filling over the contaminated
material. This may require considerable earthwork. Clean covers are most appropriate for sites
450
Chapter 8
with various previous uses and contamination. They should not be used to contain oily or
gaseous contamination. Another method is to isolate the contaminants by in situ containment
by using, for example, cut-off barriers. Encapsulation involves immobilization of contami-
nants, for instance, by the injection of grout. Low grade contaminated materials can be diluted
below threshold levels by mixing with clean soil. However, there are possible problems asso-
ciated with dilution. The need for quality assurance is high (unacceptable materials cannot be
reincorporated into the site). Other less used methods include bioremediation of organic
material, soil flushing and soil washing, incineration, vacuum extraction and venting of volatile
constituents or removal of harmful substances to be buried in containers at a purpose-built
facility.
451
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 9
Geology and Construction
Geology is one of the most important factors in construction since construction takes
place either at or below the ground surface. Hence, geology has an influence on
most construction operations because it helps determine their nature, form and cost.
Open Excavation
Open excavation refers to the removal of material, within certain specified limits, for construction
purposes. In order to accomplish this economically and without hazard, the character of the
rocks and soils involved and their geological setting must be investigated. Indeed, the method
of excavation and the rate of progress are influenced very much by the geology on site (Kentli
and Topal, 2004). Furthermore, the stability of the sides of an excavation and the position
of the water table in relation to the base level of an excavation are of importance, as are
any possible effects of construction operations on the surrounding ground and/or buildings
(Finno et al., 2005).
A Note on Slope Stability
The stability of slopes is a critical factor in open excavation. This is particularly the case
in cuttings, as for instance, for roads, canals and railways, where slopes should be designed
to resist disturbing forces over long periods. In other words, a stability analysis should determine
under what conditions a proposed slope will remain stable. For a further note on slope stability,
see Chapter 3.
Instability in a soil mass occurs when slip surfaces develop and movements are initiated
within it. Undesirable properties in a soil, such as low shearing strength, development of
fissures and high pore water pressure, tend to encourage instability and are likely to lead
to deterioration in slopes. In the case of open excavation, removal of material can give rise
to the dissipation of residual stress that can aid instability.
There are several methods available for analysis of the stability of slopes in soils
(Morgenstern, 1995). Most of these may be classed as limit equilibrium methods, in which the
453
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
basic assumption is that the failure criterion is satisfied along the assumed path of failure.
Starting from known or assumed values of the forces acting upon the soil mass, calculation
is made of the shear resistance required for equilibrium of the soil. This shear resistance
then is compared with the estimated or available shear strength of the soil to give an indication
of the factor of safety, assessed in two dimensions instead of all three. The analysis gives
a conservative result.
The design of a slope excavated in a rock mass requires as much information as possible
on the character of the discontinuities within the rock mass, since its stability is frequently
dependent on the nature of the discontinuities (Hoek and Bray, 1981). Information relating
to the spatial relationships between discontinuities affords some indication of the modes
of failure that may occur. Information relating to the shear strength of the rock mass or, more
particularly, the shear strength along discontinuities, is required for use in a stability analysis
(Bye and Bell, 2001). The inclination of discontinuities is always the most important parame-
ter for slopes of medium and large height.
Excavations in Rocks and Soils
Slopes of excavations in fresh massive plutonic igneous rocks such as granite and gabbro
can be left more of less vertical after removal of loose fragments. On the other hand, volcanic
rocks such as basalt and andesite generally are bedded and jointed, and may contain layers
of ash, which usually are softer and weather more rapidly. Thus, slope angles have to be
reduced accordingly.
Gneiss, quartzite and hornfels are highly weather resistant and slopes in them may be left
almost vertical. Schist varies in character, and some of the softer types may be weathered
and tend to slide along their planes of schistosity. Slate generally resists weathering,
although slips may occur where the cleavage daylights into a cut face.
If strata are horizontal, then excavation is relatively straightforward, and slopes can be deter-
mined with some degree of certainty. Vertical slopes can be excavated in massive limestone
and sandstone that are horizontally bedded. In brittle, cemented shale, slopes of 60–75∞
usually are safe, but increasing fissility and decreasing strength necessitate flatter slopes.
Even in weak shale, slopes are seldom flatter than 45∞. However, excavated slopes may have
to be modified in accordance with the dip and strike directions in inclined strata. The most
stable excavation in dipping strata is one in which the face is orientated normal to the strike,
since in such situations there is a low tendency for rocks to slide along their bedding planes.
Conversely, if the strike is parallel to the face, then the strata dip into one slope. This is most
critical where the rocks dip at angles varying between 30 and 70∞. If the dip exceeds 70∞
454
Chapter 9
and there is no alternative to working against the dip, then the face should be developed
parallel to the bedding planes for safety reasons.
Inclined sedimentary sequences in which thin layers of shale or clay occur between beds
of sandstone or limestone may have to be treated with caution, especially if the bedding
planes are dipping at a critical angle. Weathering may reduce such material to an unstable
state within a short period of time that, in turn, can lead to slope failure.
A slope of 1:1.5 is generally used when excavating dry sand, this more or less correspond-
ing to the angle of repose, that is, 30–40∞. This means that a cutting in a coarse soil will be
stable, irrespective of its height, as long as the slope is equal to the lower limit of the angle
of internal friction, provided that the slope is drained suitably. In other words, the factor
of safety, F, with respect to sliding may be obtained from:
tanf
F = (9.1)
tanb
where fis the angle of internal friction and bis the slope angle.
Slope failure in coarse soils is a surface phenomenon that is caused by the particles rolling
over each other down the slope. As far as sands are concerned, their packing density is
important. For example, densely packed sands that are very slightly cemented may have
excavated faces with high angles that are stable. The water content is of paramount impor-
tance in loosely packed sands, for if these are saturated they are likely to flow on excavation.
The most frequently used gradients in many clay soils vary between 30 and 45∞. In some
clays, however, in order to achieve stability, the slope angle may have to be less than 20∞.
The stability of slopes in clay depends not only on its strength and the angle of the slope but
also on the depth to which the excavation is taken and on the depth of a firm stratum, if one
exists, not far below the base level of the excavation. Slope failure in a uniform clay soil takes
place along a near-circular surface of slippage. For example, the critical height, H, to which
a face of an open excavation in normally consolidated clay can stand vertically without
support can be obtained from:
4c
H= (9.2)
9.8g
where cis the cohesion of the clay and g its unit weight.
In stiff fissured clays, the fissures appreciably reduce the strength to below that of intact mate-
rial (Skempton, 1964). Thus, reliable estimation of slope stability in stiff fissured clays is difficult.
455
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Generally, steep slopes can be excavated in such clays initially but their excavation means
that fissures open due to the relief of residual stress, and there is a change from negative to
positive pore water pressure along the fissures, the former having tended to hold the fissures
together. This change can occur within a matter of days or hours. Not only does this weaken
the clay but it also permits a more significant ingress of water, which means that the clay is
softened. Irregular-shaped blocks may begin to fall from the face, and slippage may occur
along well-defined fissure surfaces that are by no means circular. If there are no risks to property
above the crests of slopes in stiff fissured clays, then they can be excavated at about 35∞.
Although this will not prevent slips, those that occur are likely to be small.
The stability of the floor of large excavations may be influenced by ground heave. The amount
of heave and the rate at which it occurs depends on the degree of reduction in vertical stress
during construction operations, on the type and succession of underlying strata and on
the surface and groundwater conditions. Heave generally is greater in the centre of a level
excavation in relatively homogeneous ground as, for example, clays and shales. Long-term
swelling involves absorption of water from the ground surface or is due to water migrating
from below. Where the excavation is in overconsolidated clays or shales, swelling and soften-
ing is quite rapid. In the case of clays with low degrees of saturation, swelling and softening take
place very rapidly if surface water gains access to the excavation area.
Methods of Excavation: Drilling and Blasting
The method of excavation is determined largely by the geology of the site, however,
consideration also must be given to the surroundings. For instance, drilling and blasting,
although generally the most effective and economical method of excavating hard
rock, are not desirable in built-up areas since damage to property or inconvenience may
be caused.
The rock properties that influence drillability include hardness, abrasiveness, grain size and
discontinuities. The harder the rock, the stronger the bit that is required for drilling since
higher pressures need to be exerted. Abrasiveness may be regarded as the ability of a rock
to wear away drill bits. This property is closely related to hardness and in addition is
influenced by particle shape and texture. The size of the fragments produced during drilling
operations influence abrasiveness. For example, large fragments may cause scratching
but comparatively little wear, whereas the production of dust in stronger but less abrasive
rock causes polishing. This may lead to the development of high skin hardness on tungsten
carbide bits that, in turn, may cause them to spall. Even diamond-studded bits lose their
cutting ability upon polishing. Generally, coarse-grained rocks can be drilled more quickly
than fine-grained varieties or those in which the grain size is variable.
456
Chapter 9
The ease of drilling in rocks in which there are many discontinuities is influenced by their
orientation in relation to the drillhole. Drilling over an open discontinuity means that part of the
energy controlling drill penetration is lost. Where a drillhole crosses discontinuities at a low
angle, this may cause the bit to stick. It also may lead to excessive wear and to the hole going
off line. Drilling across the dip is generally less difficult than drilling with it. If the ground is
badly broken, then the drillhole may require casing. Where discontinuities are filled with clay,
this may penetrate the flush holes in the bit, causing it to bind or deviate from alignment.
Spacing of the blastholes is determined on the one hand in relation to the strength, density
and fracture pattern within the rock, and on the other in relation to the size of the charge.
Careful trials are the only certain method of determining the correct burden and blasting
pattern in any rock. As a rule, spacing varies between 0.75 and 1.25 times the burden.
Generally, 1 kg of high explosive will bring down about 8–12 tonnes of rock. Good fragmen-
tation reduces or eliminates the amount of secondary blasting while minimizing wear and tear
on loading machinery.
Rocks characterized by high specific gravity and high intergranular cohesion with no pre-
ferred orientation of mineral grains cause difficulties in blasting. They have high tensile
strength and very low brittleness values, the high tensile strength resisting crack initiation and
propagation upon blasting. Examples are provided by gabbros, breccias and greenstones.
A second group that provides difficulties includes those rocks, such as certain granites,
gneisses and marbles, which are relatively brittle with a low resistance to dynamic stresses.
Blasting in such rocks gives rise to extensive pulverization immediately about the charged
holes, leaving the area between almost unfractured. These rocks do not give an effective
energy transfer from the detonated charge to the rock mass. The third category of rocks
giving rise to difficult blasting is those possessing marked preferred orientation, mica schist
being a typical example. The difficulty arises from the influence of the mechanical anistropy
due to the preferred orientation of the flaky minerals. These rocks split easily along the
lineation but crack propagation across it is limited.
In many excavations, it is important to keep overbreak to a minimum. Apart from the cost of
its replacement with concrete, damage to the rock forming the walls or floor may lower its
strength and necessitate further excavation. What is more, smooth faces allow excavation
closer to the payline and are more stable. There are two basic methods that can be used for
this purpose, namely, line drilling and presplitting.
Line drilling is the method most commonly used to improve the peripheral shaping of excavations.
It consists of drilling alternate holes between the main blastholes forming the edge of the
excavation. The quantity of explosive placed in each line hole is significantly smaller and
indeed if these holes are closely spaced, from 150 to 250 mm, then explosive may be placed
457
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
only in every second or third hole. The closeness of the holes is based on the type of rock
being excavated and on the payline. These holes are timed to fire ahead, with or after the
nearest normally charged holes of the blasting pattern. The time of firing similarly is depend-
entlargely on the character of the rock involved.
Pre-splitting can be defined as the establishment of a free surface or shear plane in a rock
mass by the controlled usage of explosives in appropriately aligned and spaced drillholes.
A line of trimming holes is charged and fired to produce a shear plane. This acts as a limiting
plane for the blast proper and is carried out prior to the drilling and blasting of the main round
inside the proposed break lines. The spacing of the trimming holes is governed by the type
of rock and the diameter of the hole. Once pre-split, the rock excavation can be blasted with
a normal pattern of holes. In most rocks, a shear plane can be induced to the bottom of the
line holes, that is, to base level, but in very tight unfissured rocks, difficulty may be experi-
enced in breaking out the main blast to base level.
Possible damage to property due to blasting vibrations can be estimated in terms of
ground velocity, but it is extremely difficult to determine the limit values of ground velocity
for varying degrees of damage. However, a conservative limit of 50 mm s- 1 seems
to be commonly accepted as the limit below which no damage will be caused to internal
renderings and plasterwork. Nevertheless, low vibration levels may disturb sensitive
machinery.
Vibrographs can be placed in locations considered susceptible to blast damage in order to
monitor ground velocity. A record of the blasting effects compared with the size of the charge
and distance from the point of detonation normally is sufficient to reduce the possibility of
damage to a minimum (Fig. 9.1). The use of multiple-row blasting with short-delay ignition
reduces the effects of vibration.
Methods of Excavation: Ripping
The major objective of ripping in construction practice is to break the rock just enough to
enable economic loading to take place (Fig. 9.2). Rippability depends on intact strength, frac-
ture index and abrasiveness, that is, strong, massive and abrasive rocks do not lend them-
selves to ripping (MacGregor et al., 1994). On the other hand, if sedimentary rocks such as
sandstone and limestone are well bedded and jointed, or if strong and weak rocks are thinly
interbedded, then they can be excavated by ripping rather than by blasting. Indeed, some of
the weaker sedimentary rocks (less than 1 MPa point load strength, 15 MPa compressive
strength) such as mudstones are not as easily removed by blasting as their low strength
would suggest since they are pulverized in the immediate vicinity of the hole. What is
458
Figure 9.1
Charge Qas a function of distance for various charge levels.
Figure 9.2
Abulldozer with tyne attachment being used for ripping in a limestone quarry near Kansas City, United States.
459
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.3
Rippability chart.
more, when blasted, mudstones may lift along bedding planes to fall back when the
pressure has been dissipated. Such rocks, particularly if well jointed, are more suited to
ripping.
The most common method for determining rippability is by seismic refraction. The seismic
velocity of the rock mass concerned then can be compared with a chart of ripper performance
based on ripping operations in a wide variety of rocks (Fig. 9.3). Kirsten (1988), however,
argued that seismic velocity could only provide a provisional indication of the way in which
rock masses could be excavated. Previously, Weaver (1975) had proposed the use of a
modified form of the geomechanics classification as a rating system for the assessment of
rock mass rippability (Table 9.1).
The run direction during ripping should be normal to any vertical joint planes, down-dip to any
inclined strata and, on sloping ground, downhill. Ripping runs of 70–90 m usually give the
best results. Where possible, the ripping depth should be adjusted so that a forward speed
of 3 km h- 1 can be maintained, since this generally is found to be the most productive.
Adequate breakage depends on the spacing between ripper runs that are, in turn, governed
by the fracture pattern in the rock mass.
460
461
Chapter
9
Table 9.1. Rippability rating chart (after Weaver, 1975). With the permission of the Institution of Civil Engineers of South Africa
Rock class
I II III IV V
Description Very good rock Good rock Fair rock Poor rock Very poor rock
Seismic velocity (m/s) > 2150 2150–1850 1850–1500 1500–1200 1200–450
Rating 26 24 20 12 5
Rock hardness (MPa) Extremely hard rock Very hard rock Hard rock Soft rock Very soft rock
(> 70) (20–70) (10–20) (3–10) (1.7–3.0)
Rating 10 5 2 1 0
Rock weathering Unweathered Slightly weathered Weathered Highly weathered Completely
weathered
Rating 9 7 5 3 1
Joint spacing (mm) > 3000 3000–1000 1000–300 300–50 <50
Rating 30 25 20 10 5
Joint capacity Non-continuous Slightly continuous Continuous – Continuous – some Continuous –
no gouge gouge with gouge
Rating 5 6 3 0 0
Joint gouge No separation Slight separation Separation <1 mm Gouge <5 mm Gouge >5 mm
Rating 5 5 4 3 1
Strike and dip orientation* Very unfavourable Unfavourable Slightly Favourable Very favourable
unfavourable
Rating 15 13 10 5 3
Total rating 100–90 90–70† 70–50 50–25 <25
Rippability assessment Blasting Extremely hard Very hard ripping Hard ripping Easy ripping
ripping and
blasting
Tractor selection — DD9G/D9G D9/D8 D8/D7 D7
Horsepower — 770/385 385/270 270–180 180
Kilowatts — 575–290 290/200 200–135 135
* Original strike and dip orientation now revised for rippability assessment.
†Ratings in excess of 75 should be regarded as unrippable without preblasting.
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Methods of Excavation: Digging
The diggability of ground is of major importance in the selection of excavating equipment and
depends principally upon the intact strength of the ground, its bulk density, bulking factor and nat-
ural water content. The latter influences the adhesion or stickiness of soils, especially clay soils.
At present, there is no generally acceptable quantitative measure of diggability, assessment
usually being made according to the experience of the operators. However, a fairly reliable
indication can be obtained from similar excavations in the same materials in the area or the
behaviour of the ground excavated in trial pits. Attempts have been made to evaluate the
performance of excavating equipment in terms of seismic velocity (Fig. 9.4). It would appear
that most earth-moving equipment operates best when the seismic velocity of the ground
is less than 1000 m s- 1and will not function above approximately 1800 m s- 1.
When material is excavated, it increases in bulk, this being brought about by the decrease that
occurs in density per unit volume. Some examples of typical bulking in soils are given in Table 9.2.
The bulking factor is important in relation to loading and removal of material from the working face.
Groundwater and Excavation
Groundwater frequently represents one of the most difficult problems during excavation, and
its removal can prove costly. Not only does water make working conditions difficult, but piping,
uplift pressures and flow of water into an excavation can lead to erosion and failure of the sides.
Figure 9.4
Seismic velocities for determining diggability.
462
Chapter 9
Table 9.2. Density, bulking factor and diggability of some common soils
Soil type Density (Mg m-3) Bulking factor Diggability
Gravel, dry 1.8 1.25 E
Sand, dry 1.7 1.15 E
Sand and gravel, dry 1.95 1.15 E
Clay, light 1.65 1.3 M
Clay, heavy 2.1 1.35 M–H
Clay, gravel and sand, dry 1.6 1.3 M
Note: E =easy digging, loose, free-running material such as sand and small gravel; M =medium
digging, partially consolidated materials such as clayey gravel and clay; M–H =medium hard digging,
materials such as heavy wet clay and large boulders.
Collapsed material has to be removed and the damage made good. Subsurface water
normally is under pressure, which increases with increasing depth below the water table.
Under high pressure gradients, weakly cemented rock can disintegrate. High piezometric
pressures may cause the floor of an excavation to heave or, worse still, cause a blow-out
(see Chapter 4). Hence, data relating to the groundwater conditions should be obtained prior
to the commencement of operations.
Some of the worst conditions are met in excavations that have to be taken below the water
table (Forth, 2004). In such cases, the water level must be lowered by some method of
dewatering. The method adopted depends on the permeability of the ground and its variation
within the stratal sequence, the depth of base level below the water table and the piezometric
conditions in underlying horizons. Pumping from sumps within an excavation, bored wells or
wellpoints are the dewatering methods most frequently used (Bell and Cashman, 1986).
Impermeable barriers such as steel sheet piles, secant piles, diaphragm walls, frozen walls
and grouted walls can be used to keep water out of excavations (Bell and Mitchell, 1986).
Ideally, these structures should be keyed into an impermeable horizon beneath the excavation.
Methods of Slope Control and Stabilization
It rarely is economical to design a rock slope so that no subsequent rock falls occur, indeed
many roads in rough terrain could not be constructed with the finance available without
accepting some such risk. Therefore, except where absolute security is essential, slopes
should be designed to allow small falls of rock under controlled conditions.
Fences supported by rigid posts can contain small rockfalls, but larger heavy duty catch
fences are required for larger rockfalls. Rock traps in the form of a ditch and/or barrier can be
463
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.5
Wire netting fixed to a steep slope excavated in gneiss, northeast of Bergen, Norway.
installed at the foot of a slope. Benches on a slope also may act as traps to retain rock fall,
especially if a barrier is placed at their edge. Wire mesh fixed to the face provides yet another
method for controlling rockfall (Fig. 9.5). Where a road or railway passes along the foot of
a steep slope, protection from rockfall is afforded by the construction of a rigid canopy from
the face of the slope.
Excavation involving the removal of material from the head of an unstable slope, flattening of
the slope, benching of the slope or complete removal of the unstable material helps stabilize
a slope. If some form of reinforcement is required to provide support for a rock slope, then it
is advisable to install it as quickly as possible after excavation. Dentition refers to masonry or
concrete infill placed in fissures or cavities in a rock slope (Fig. 9.6). Thin-to-medium-bedded
rocks dipping parallel to the slope can be held in place by steel dowels grouted into drilled
holes, which are up to 2 m in length. Rock bolts may be up to 8 m in length with tensile work-
ing loads of up to 100 kN (Fig. 9.6). They are put in tension so that the compression induced
in the rock mass improves shearing resistance on potential failure planes. Light steel sections
or steel mesh may be used between bolts to support the rock face. Rock anchors are used
for major stabilization works, especially in conjunction with retaining structures. They may
exceed 30 m in length. In general, for excavated slopes it is more advantageous to improve
464
Chapter 9
Figure 9.6
Dentition and rock bolts used to stabilize an excavation in limestone along the A55 road in North Wales.
the properties of the rock slope itself (by anchoring or bolting) than to remove the rock and
replace it with concrete.
Gunite or shotcrete frequently is used to preserve the integrity of a rock face by sealing the
surface and inhibiting the action of weathering (Fig. 9.7). They are pneumatically applied
mortar or concrete, respectively. Coatings may be reinforced with wire mesh and used in
combination with rock bolts. Heavily fractured rocks may be grouted in order to stabilize them.
Restraining structures control sliding by increasing the resistance to movement. They include
retaining walls, cribs, gabions and buttresses. There are certain limitations that must be con-
sidered before retaining walls are used for slope control. These involve the ability of the struc-
ture to resist shearing action, overturning and sliding on or below the base of the structure.
Retaining walls often are used where there is a lack of space for the full development
of a slope, such as along many roads and railways. As retaining walls are subjected to
unfavourable loading, a large wall width is necessary to increase slope stability. Reinforced
earth can be used for retaining earth slopes. Such a structure is flexible and so can accom-
modate some settlement. Thus, reinforced earth can be used on poor ground where
conventional alternatives would require expensive foundations. Reinforced earth walls are
constructed by erecting a thin front skin at the face of the wall at the same time as the earth
465
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.7
An excavation in gneiss that has been shotcreted, Goteborg, Sweden.
is placed (Fig. 9.8). Strips of steel or geogrid are fixed to the facing skin at regular intervals.
Cribs may be constructed of precast reinforced concrete or steel units set up in cells that are
filled with gravel or stone (Fig. 9.9a). Gabions consist of strong wire mesh surrounding placed
stones (Fig. 9.9b). Concrete buttresses occasionally have been used to support large blocks
of rock, usually where they overhang.
Geosynthetic materials, especially geomats and geogrids, are being used increasingly to
protect slopes. They are draped over slopes requiring protection and are pegged onto the soil.
Geomats are three-dimensional geosynthetics that, if filled with soil and seed, help to establish
a vegetative cover.
Drainage generally is the most applicable method for improving the stability of slopes or for
the corrective treatment of slides, regardless of type, since it reduces the effectiveness of one
of the principal causes of instability, namely, excess pore water pressure. The most likely
zone of failure must be determined so that the extent of the slope mass that requires drainage
treatment can be defined.
466
Chapter 9
Figure 9.8
Reinforced earth being used along the A82 road in Scotland.
(a)
Figure 9.9
(a) Acrib wall being used to retain a slope in San Antonio, Texas.
Continued
467
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
(b)
Figure 9.9—cont’d
(b) Gabions used to retain a slope just outside Port St. Johns, South Africa.
Surface run-off should not be allowed to flow unrestrained over a slope. This usually is pre-
vented by the installation of a drainage ditch at the top of an excavated slope to collect
drainage from above. The ditch, especially if in soils, should be lined to prevent erosion,
otherwise its enlargement will mean that it will act as a tension crack. It may be filled with
cobble aggregate. Herringbone ditch drainage usually is employed to convey water from
the surfaces of slopes. These drainage ditches lead into an interceptor drain at the foot of
the slope (Fig. 9.10a). Infiltration can be lowered by sealing the cracks in a slope by regrading
or filling with cement, bitumen or clay. A surface covering has a similar purpose and function.
For example, the slope may be covered with granular material resting upon filter fabric.
Support and drainage may be afforded by counterfort-drains, where an excavation is made
in sidelong ground, likely to undergo shallow, parallel slides. Deep trenches are cut into the
slope, lined with filter fabrics and filled with granular material. The granular fill in each trench acts
as a supporting buttress or counterfort, as well as providing drainage. However, counterfort
drains must extend beneath the potential failure zone, otherwise they merely add unwelcome
weight to the sloping mass.
Successful use of subsurface drainage depends on tapping the source of water, locating the
presence of permeable material that aids free drainage, the location of the drain on relatively
468
Chapter 9
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.10
(a) Surface drainage of a slope in deposits of till, near Loch Lomond, Scotland. The aggregate-filled ditch drainage leads to
an interceptor drain. (b) Internal drainage gallery in restored slope, near Aberfan, South Wales.
469
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
unyielding material to ensure continuous operation (flexible PVC drains are now frequently
used) and the installation of a filter to minimize silting in the drainage channel. Drainage
galleries are costly to construct and in slipping areas may experience caving (Fig. 9.10b). They
should be backfilled with stone to ensure their drainage capacity if partially deformed by
subsequent movements. Galleries are indispensable in the case of large slipped masses
where drainage has to be carried out over lengths of 200 m or more. Drillholes may be made
about the perimeter of a gallery to enhance drainage. Drainage holes with perforated pipes are
much cheaper than galleries and are satisfactory over short lengths, but it is more difficult to
intercept water-bearing layers with them. When individual benches are drained by horizontal
holes, the latter should lead into a properly graded interceptor trench, which is lined with
impermeable material.
Deep wells may be used to drain slopes. Usually, the water collected is conveyed away at
the base of the well but at times pumps may be installed at the bottom of a well to remove
the water.
Tunnels and Tunnelling
Geology is the most important factor that determines the nature, form and cost of a tunnel.
For example, the route, design and construction of a tunnel are largely dependent on geological
considerations. Estimating the cost of tunnel construction, particularly in areas of geological
complexity, is uncertain.
Prior to tunnel construction, the subsurface geology is explored by means of pits, adits
(drifts), drilling and pilot tunnels. Exploration adits driven before tunnelling proper commences
are not usually resorted to unless a particular section appears to be especially dangerous
or a great deal of uncertainty exists. Core drilling aids the interpretation of geological features
already identified at the surface.
A pilot tunnel is probably the best method of exploring tunnel locations and should be used if
a major-sized tunnel is to be constructed in ground that is known to have critical geological
conditions. It also drains the rock ahead of the main excavation. If the inflow of water is
excessive, the rock can be grouted from the pilot tunnel before the main excavation reaches
the water-bearing zone.
Reliable information relating to the ground conditions ahead of the advancing face obviously
is desirable during tunnel construction. This can be achieved with a varying degree of success
by drilling long horizontal holes between shafts, or by direct drilling from the tunnel face at
regular intervals. In extremely poor ground conditions, tunnelling progresses behind an array
470
Chapter 9
of probe holes that fan outwards some 10–30 m ahead of the tunnel face. Although this
slows progress, it ensures completion. Holes drilled upwards from the crown of the tunnel and
forwards from the side walls help locate any abnormal features such as faults, buried channels,
weak seams or solution cavities. Equipment for drilling in a forward direction can be incorpo-
rated into a shield or tunnel boring machine. The penetration rate of a probe drill must exceed
that of the tunnel boring machine, ideally it should be about three times faster. Maintaining
the position of the hole, however, presents the major problem when horizontal drilling is
undertaken. In particular, variations in hardness of the ground oblique to the direction of
drilling can cause radical deviations. Even in uniform ground, rods go off line. The inclination
of a hole therefore must be surveyed.
Geophysical investigations can give valuable assistance in determination of subsurface con-
ditions, especially in areas in which the solid geology is poorly exposed. Seismic refraction
has been used in measuring depths of overburden in the portal areas of tunnels, in locating
faults, weathered zones or buried channels, and in estimating rock quality. Seismic testing
also can be used to investigate the topography of a river bed and the interface between the
alluvium and bedrock when tunnels are excavated beneath rivers. Seismic logging of bore-
holes can, under favourable circumstances, provide data relating to the engineering proper-
ties of rock. Resistivity techniques have proved useful in locating water tables and buried
faults, particularly those that are saturated. Resistivity logs of drillholes are used in lateral
correlation of layered materials of different resistivities and in the detection of permeable rocks.
Ground probing radar offers the possibility of exploring large volumes of rock for anomalies
in a short time and at low cost, in advance of major subsurface excavations.
Geological Conditions and Tunnelling
Large planar surfaces form most of the roof in a formation that is not inclined at a high angle
and strikes more or less parallel to the axis of a tunnel. In tunnels in which jointed strata dip
into the side at 30∞or more, the up-dip side may be unstable. Joints that are parallel to the
axis of a tunnel and that dip at more than 45∞may prove especially treacherous, leading to
slabbing of the walls and fallouts from the roof. The effect of joint orientation in relation to the
axis of a tunnel is given in Table 9.3.
The presence of flat-lying joints may also lead to blocks becoming dislodged from the roof.
When the tunnel alignment is normal to the strike of jointed rocks and the dips are less than 15∞,
large blocks are again likely to fall from the roof. The sides, however, tend to be
reasonably stable. When a tunnel is driven perpendicular to the strike in steeply dipping
or vertical strata, each stratum acts as a beam with a span equal to the width of the cross
section. However, in such a situation, blasting operations are generally less efficient. If the
471
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 9.3. The effect of joint strike and dip orientations in tunnelling
Strike perpendicular to tunnel axis
Strike parallel with
Drive with dip Drive against dip tunnel axis
Dip Dip Dip Dip Dip Dip
45–90∞ 20–45∞ 45–90∞ 20–45∞ 45–90∞ 20–45∞
Very favourable Favourable Fair Unfavourable Very unfavourable Fair
Dip 0–20∞unfavourable irrespective of strike
axis of a tunnel runs parallel to the strike of vertically dipping rocks, then the mass of rock
above the roof is held by the friction along the bedding planes. In such a situation, the upper
boundary of loosened rock, according to Terzaghi (1946), does not extend beyond a distance
of 0.25 times the tunnel width above the crown.
When the joint spacing in horizontally layered rocks is greater than the width of a tunnel, then
the beds bridge the tunnel as a solid slab and are only subject to bending under their own
weight. Thus, if the bending forces are less than the tensile strength of the rock, then the roof
need not be supported. In conventional tunnelling, in which horizontally lying rocks are thickly
bedded and contain few joints, the roof of the tunnel is flat. Conversely, if the rocks are thinly
bedded and are intersected by many joints, a peaked roof is formed. Nonetheless, breakage
rarely, if ever, continues beyond a vertical distance equal to half the width of the tunnel above
the top of a semicircular payline (Fig. 9.11). This type of stratification is more dangerous
where the beds dip at 5–10∞, since this may lead to the roof spalling, as the tunnel is
driven forward.
Figure 9.11
Overbreak in thinly bedded horizontal strata with joints. Ultimate overbreak occurs if no support is installed.
472
Chapter 9
Weathering of rocks leads to the strength of the material being reduced, at times dramatically.
However, weathering processes are rarely sufficiently uniform to give gradual and predictable
changes in the engineering properties of a weathered profile. In fact, such profiles usually
consist of heterogenous materials at various stages of decomposition and/or disintegration.
Mudrocks are more susceptible to weathering and breakdown than most other rock types
(Bell et al., 1997). The breakdown of mudrocks begins on exposure, which leads to the opening
and development of fissures as residual stress is dissipated, and to an increase in moisture
content and softening. Olivier (1979) developed the geodurability classification (see Chapter 3)
primarily to assess the durability of mudrocks and poorly cemented sandstones during
tunnelling operations, since the tendency of such rocks to disintegrate governs the stand-up
time of tunnels. Some basalts and dolerites also are susceptible to rapid weathering. Bell and
Haskins (1997) noted that degradation of the basalts on exposure in the Transfer Tunnel from
Katse Dam, Lesotho, initially took the form of crazing, that is, extensive microfracturing.
These microfractures expand with time, causing the basalt to disintegrate into gravel-sided
fragments. Some minerals are prone to rapid breakdown on exposure, and their reaction
products can give rise to further problems. For example, sulphur compounds, notably pyrite,
on breakdown, give rise to ferrous sulphate and sulphuric acid, which are injurious to con-
crete. Gypsum, especially when in particulate form, can be dissolved rapidly and similarly
generates sulphates and sulphuric acid. Hydration of anhydrite to gypsum produces an
increase in volume. For example, Yuzer (1982) recorded swelling pressures up to 12 MPa
when tunnelling through an evaporitic formation in Turkey. It is believed that no great length
of time is required to bring about such hydration.
Problems of tunnel excavation and tunnel stability in areas of karstic limestone may be asso-
ciated with weathered rock, abrupt changes in lithology, rock weakened by dissolution or con-
taining discontinuites opened by dissolution, as well as with the presence of voids and
caverns with or without infill. Furthermore, a large cavern in the path of a tunnel presents a
difficult problem and may delay excavation or, in extreme cases, may mean that the tunnel
has to be diverted around it or relocated. Milanovic (2003) gave examples of several tunnels
in China in which the planned route of the tunnel had to be relocated because of the pres-
ence of large caverns through which underground streams flowed. In addition, construction
of a tunnel may alter the groundwater regime of the locality, as a tunnel usually acts as a drain.
This can lead to dewatering, leading to sinkhole development/reactivation, which may be
manifested in the form of surface subsidence, as occurred at the Canyon Tunnel, Sri Lanka
(James, 1993). Isolated heavy flows of groundwater may occur in association with solution
pipes and cavities or fault zones, especially those in which the limestone has been crushed
and subjected to dissolution. When water is under appreciable pressure it may break into the
tunnel as a gusher. For example, Calembert (1975) reported that 1000 l s- 1 entered the
Talave Tunnel in Spain and that the flow was diminished only after several months. The water
table in karstic carbonate rocks can rise rapidly after periods of sustained or heavy rainfall,
473
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
sometimes by tens of metres in a number of hours. If the water table rises above the axis of
a tunnel in karstic limestone with well-developed conduits, then this can lead to rapid flooding
of the tunnel. Also, when tunnelling in karst terrains, primarily above the water table, sediment
that has collected in cavities, voids and enlarged discontinuities may be washed into the
tunnel as mud after severe storms. Again quoting Calembert (1975), more than 30000 m3
of debris entered the Gran Sasso Tunnel, Spain. The debris was associated with a wide
faulted zone that had been subjected to dissolution. This interrupted construction for many
months.
Faults generally mean non-uniform rock pressures on a tunnel and hence necessitate
special treatment at times, such as the construction of box sections with invert arches.
Generally, problems increase as the strike of a fault becomes more parallel to the tunnel
opening. However, even if the strike is across the tunnel, faults with low dips can represent
a hazard. If the tunnel is driven from the hanging wall, the fault first appears at the invert, and
it generally is possible to provide adequate support or reinforcement when driving through the
rest of the zone. Conversely, when a tunnel is driven from the foot-wall side, the fault first
appears in the crown, and there is a possibility that a wedge-shaped block, formed by the
fault and the tunnel, will fall from the roof without warning.
Major faults usually are associated with a number of minor faults, and the dislocation zone may
occur over many metres. What is more, rock material within a faulted zone may be shattered
and unstable. Problems tend to increase with increasing width of the fault zone. Sometimes,
a fault zone is filled with sand-sized crushed rock that has a tendency to flow into the tunnel.
If, in addition, the tunnel is located beneath the water table, a sandy suspension may rush
into the tunnel. When a fault zone is occupied by clay gouge and a section of a tunnel follows
the gouge zone, swelling of this material may occur and cause displacement or breakage of
tunnel supports during construction. Large quantities of water in a permeable rock mass are
impounded by a fault zone occupied by impervious gouge and are released when tunnelling
operations penetrate through the fault zone.
Movements along major active faults in certain parts of the world can disrupt a tunnel lining
and even lead to a tunnel being offset. As a consequence, it is best to shift the alignment to
avoid the fault, or, if possible, to use open cut within the active fault.
The earthquake risk to an underground structure is influenced by the material in which it
occurs. For instance, a tunnel at shallow depth in alluvial deposits will be seriously affected
by a notable earthquake because of the large relative displacements of the ground surround-
ing it. On the other hand, a deep tunnel in solid rock will be subjected to displacements that
are considerably less than those that occur at the surface. The main causes of stresses in shallow
underground structures arise from the interaction between the structure and displacement
474
Chapter 9
of the ground. If the structure is sufficiently flexible, it will follow the displacements and defor-
mations to which the ground is subjected.
Rocks, especially those at depth, are affected by the weight of overburden, and the stresses so
developed cause the rocks to be strained. In certain areas, particularly orogenic belts, the state of
stress is also influenced by tectonic factors. However, because the rocks at depth are confined,
they suffer partial strain. The stress that does not give rise to strain, in other words, stress which
is not dissipated, remains in the rocks as residual stress. While the rocks remain in a confined
condition, the stresses accumulate and may reach high values, sometimes in excess of yield
point. If the confining condition is removed, as in tunnelling, then the residual stress can cause
displacement. The amount of movement depends on the magnitude of the residual stress. The
pressure relief, which represents a decrease in residual stress, may be instantaneous or slow in
character, and is accompanied by movement of the rock mass with variable degrees of violence.
In tunnels, driven at great depths below the surface, rock may suddenly break from the sides
of the excavation. This phenomenon is referred to as rock bursting. In such failures, hundreds
of tonnes of rock may be released with explosive force. Rock bursts are due to the dissipation of
residual stresses that exceed the strength of the ground around the excavation, and theirfre-
quency and severity tend to increase with depth. Indeed, most rock bursts occur at depths in
excess of 600 m. The stronger the rock, the more likely it is to burst. The most explosive
failures occur in rocks that have unconfined compressive strengths and values of Young’s
modulus greater than 140 MPa and 34.5 GPa, respectively.
Popping is a similar but less violent form of failure. In this case, the sides of an excavation
bulge before exfoliating. Spalling tends to occur in jointed or cleaved rocks. To a certain extent,
such a rock mass can bulge as a sheet, collapse occurring when a key block either fails or
is detached from the mass.
In fissile rock such as shale, the beds may slowly bend into the tunnel. In this case, the rock
is not necessarily detached from the main mass, but the deformation may cause fissures and
hollows in the rock surrounding the tunnel.
Another pressure relief phenomenon is bumping ground. Bumps are sudden and somewhat
violent earth tremors that, at times, dislodge rock from the sides of a tunnel. They probably
are due to rock displacements consequent upon the newly created stress conditions.
Tunnelling in Soft Ground
All soft ground moves in the course of tunnelling operations (Peck, 1969). In addition, some
strata change their characteristics on exposure to air. Both factors put a premium on speed
475
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
of advance, and successful tunnelling requires matching the work methods to the stand-up
time of the ground.
As far as soft-ground tunnelling is concerned, the difficulties and costs of construction depend
almost exclusively on the stand-up time of the ground and this, in turn, is influenced by the
position of the water table in relation to the tunnel (Hansmire, 1981). Above the water table,
the stand-up time principally depends on the shearing and tensile strength of the ground,
whereas below it, it also is influenced by the permeability of the material involved.
Occasionally, tunnels in soft ground may suffer partial collapse, for example, the Hull waste-
water flow transfer tunnel, England, was constructed mainly in glacial soils but collapse
occurred in 1999 in a relatively short stretch of alluvial soils (Grose and Benton, 2005).
Terzaghi (1950a) distinguished the following types of soft ground:
1. Firm ground. Firm ground has sufficient shearing and tensile strength to allow the
tunnel heading to be advanced without support, typical representatives being stiff
clays with low plasticity and loess above the water table.
2. Ravelling ground. In ravelling ground, blocks fall from the roof and sides of the
tunnel some time after the ground has been exposed. The strength of the ground
usually decreases with increasing duration of load. It also may decrease due to
dissipation of excess pore water pressures induced by ground movements in clay,
or due to evaporation of moisture with subsequent loss of apparent cohesion in silt
and fine sand. If ravelling begins within a few minutes of exposure, it is described
as fast ravelling, otherwise it is referred to as slow ravelling. Fast ravelling may take
place in residual soils and sands with a clay binder below the water table. These
materials above the water table are slow ravelling.
3. Running ground. In this type of ground, the removal of support from a surface
inclined at more than 34∞gives rise to a run, the latter occurring until the angle of
rest of the material involved is attained. Runs take place in clean, loosely packed
gravel, and clean, coarse- to medium-grained sand, both above the water table.
In clean, fine-grained, moist sand, a run usually is preceded by ravelling, such
behaviour being termed cohesive running.
4. Flowing ground. This type of ground moves like a viscous liquid. It can invade a
tunnel from any angle and, if not stopped, ultimately fills the excavation. Flowing
conditions occur in sands and silts below the water table. Such ground above the
water table exhibits either ravelling or running behaviour.
5. Squeezing ground. Squeezing ground advances slowly and imperceptibly into a tunnel.
There are no signs of fracturing of the sides. Ultimately, the roof may give, and this can
produce a subsidence trough at the surface. The two most common reasons why
ground squeezes on subsurface excavation are excessive overburden pressure
476
Chapter 9
and the dissipation of residual stress, both eventually leading to failure. Soft and
medium clays display squeezing behaviour. Other materials in which squeezing
conditions may obtain include shales and highly weathered granites, gneisses and
schists.
6. Swelling ground. Swelling ground also expands into the excavation but the movement
is associated with a considerable volume increase in the ground immediately surround-
ing the tunnel. Swelling occurs as a result of water migrating into the material of the
tunnel perimeter from the surrounding strata. These conditions develop in overconsol-
idated clays with a plasticity index in excess of about 30% and in certain shales and
mudstones, especially those containing montmorillonite. Swelling pressures are of
unpredictable magnitude and may be extremely large. For example, the swelling pres-
sure in shallow tunnels may exceed the overburden pressure and it may be as high as
2.0 MPa in overconsolidated clays. The development period may take a few weeks
or several months. Immediately after excavation, the pressure is insignificant but the
rate of swelling increases after that. In the final stages, the increase slows down.
Boulders within a soft ground matrix may prove difficult to remove, whereas if boulders are
embedded in a hard cohesive matrix, they may impede progress and may render a mechanical
excavator of almost any type impotent. Large boulders may be difficult to handle unless theyare
broken apart by jackhammer or blasting.
Water in Tunnels
The amount of water held in a soil or rock mass depends on its reservoir storage properties
(see Chapter 4) that, in turn, influence the amount of water that can drain into a tunnel.
Isolated heavy flows of water may occur in association with faults, solution pipes and cavities,
abandoned mine workings or even pockets of gravel. Tunnels driven under lakes, rivers and
other surface bodies of water may tap a considerable volume of flow. Flow also may take place
from a perched water table to a tunnel beneath.
Generally, the amount of water flowing into a tunnel decreases as construction progresses.
This is due to the gradual exhaustion of water at source and to the decrease in hydraulic gra-
dient, and hence in flow velocity. On the other hand, there may be an increase in flow as con-
struction progresses if construction operations cause fissuring. For instance, blasting may
open new water conduits around a tunnel, shift the direction of flow and, in some cases, even
cause partial flooding.
Correct estimation of the water inflow into a projected tunnel is of vital importance, as inflow
influences the construction programme (Cripps et al., 1989). One of the principal problems
477
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
created by water entering a tunnel is that of face stability. Secondary problems include removal
of excessively wet muck and the placement of a precision-fitted primary lining or of ribs.
The value of the maximum inflow is required and so are the distribution of inflow along the
tunnel section and the changes of flow with time. The greatest groundwater hazard in under-
ground work is the presence of unexpected water-bearing zones, and therefore, whenever
possible, the position of hydrogeological boundaries should be located. Obviously, the loca-
tion of the water table, and its possible fluctuations, are of major consequence.
Water pressures are more predictable than water flows as they are nearly always a function
of the head of water above the tunnel location. They can be very large, especially in confined
aquifers. Hydraulic pressures should be taken into account when considering the thickness of
rock that will separate an aquifer from a tunnel. Unfortunately, however, the hydrogeological
situation is rarely so easily interpreted as to make accurate quantitative estimates possible.
Sulphate-bearing solutions attack concrete, thus water quality must be investigated. Particular
attention should be given to water flowing from sequences containing gypsum and anhydrite.
Rocks containing iron pyrite also may give rise to water-carrying sulphates, as well as acidic
water.
Most of the serious difficulties encountered during tunnelling operations are directly or indirectly
caused by the percolation of water towards the tunnel. As a consequence, most of the techniques
for improving ground conditions are directed towards its control. This may be achievedby using
drainage, compressed air, grouting or freezing techniques.
Gases in Tunnels
Naturally occurring gas can occupy the pore spaces and voids in rock. This gas may be under
pressure, and there have been occasions when gas under pressure has burst into under-
ground workings, causing the rock to fail with explosive force (Bell and Jermy, 2002).
Wherever possible the likelihood of gas hazards should be noted during the geological
survey, but this is one of the most difficult tunnel hazards to predict. If the flow of gas appears
to be fairly continuous, then the entrance to the flow may be sealed with concrete. Often, the
supply of gas is exhausted quickly, but cases have been reported where it continued for up
to 3 weeks.
Many gases are dangerous. For example, methane, CH , which may be encountered in
4
Coal Measures, is lighter than air and can readily migrate from its point of origin. Not only is
478
Chapter 9
methane toxic, it also is combustible and highly explosive when 5–15% is mixed with air.
Carbon dioxide, CO , and carbon monoxide, CO, are both toxic. The former is heavier than
2
air and hangs about the floor of an excavation. Carbon monoxide is slightly lighter than air
and as with carbon dioxide and methane, is found in Coal Measures strata. Carbon dioxide
also may be associated with volcanic deposits and limestones. Hydrogen sulphide, H S, is
2
heavier than air and is highly toxic. It also is explosive when mixed with air. The gas may be
generated by the decay of organic substances or by volcanic activity. Hydrogen sulphide
may be absorbed by water that then becomes injurious as far as concrete is concerned.
Sulphur dioxide, SO , is a colourless pungent asphyxiating gas that dissolves readily in water
2
to form sulphuric acid. It usually is associated with volcanic emanations, or it may be formed
by the breakdown of pyrite.
Temperatures in Tunnels
Temperatures in tunnels are not usually of concern unless the tunnel is more than 170 m
below the surface. When rock is exposed by excavation, the amount of heat liberated
depends on the virgin rock temperature, VRT; the thermal properties of the rock; the length
of time of exposure; the area, size and shape of exposed rock; the wetness of rock; the air
flow rate; the dry bulb temperature; and humidity of the air.
In deep tunnels, high temperatures can make work more difficult. Indeed, high temperatures
and rock pressures place limits on the depth of tunnelling. The moisture content of the air
in tunnels is always high and, in saturated air, the efficiency of labour declines when the
temperature exceeds 25∞C, dropping to almost zero when the temperature reaches 35∞C.
Conditions can be improved by increased ventilation, by water spraying or by using refriger-
ated air. Air refrigeration is essential when the virgin rock temperature exceeds 40∞C.
The rate of increase in rock temperature with depth depends on the geothermal gradient that,
in turn, is inversely proportional to the thermal conductivity, k, of the material involved:
0.05
Geothermalgradient = (approximately)∞∞Cm-1 (9.3)
k
Although the geothermal gradient varies with locality, according to rock type and structure,
on average it increases at a rate of 1∞C per 30–35 m depth. In geologically stable areas,
the mean gradient is 1∞C for every 60–80 m, whereas in volcanic districts, it may be as much
as 1∞C for every 10–15 m depth. The geothermal gradient under mountains is larger than
under plains; in the case of valleys, the situation is reversed.
479
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The temperature of the rocks influences the temperature of any water they may contain. Fissure
water that flows into workings acts as an efficient carrier of heat. This may be locally more signif-
icant than the heat conducted through the rocks themselves. For example, for every litre of water
that enters the workings at a virgin rock temperature of 40∞C, if the water cools to 25∞C before
it reaches the pumps, then the heat added to the ventilating air stream will be 62.8 kW.
Earth temperatures can be measured by placing thermometers in drillholes, measurement being
taken when a constant temperature is attained. The results, in the form of geoisotherms,can be
plotted on the longitudinal section of a tunnel.
Excavation of Tunnels
In soft ground, support is vital and so tunnelling is carried out by using shields. A shield is a cylin-
drical drum with a cutting edge around the circumference, the cut material being delivered onto a
conveyor for removal. The limits of these machines usually are given as an unconfined compres-
sive strength of 20 MPa. Shield tunnelling means that construction can be carried out in one stage
at the full tunnel dimension and that the permanent lining is installed immediately after excavation,
thereby, providing support as the tunnel is advanced (Fig. 9.12; De Graaf and Bell, 1997).
Figure 9.12
Installation of the segmental lining, Delivery Tunnel North, Lesotho Highlands Water Scheme.
480
Chapter 9
Bentonite slurry is used to support the face in soft ground in a pressure bulkhead machine.
This represented a major innovation in mechanized tunnelling, particularly in coarse sedi-
ments not suited to compressed air. The bentonite slurry counterbalances the hydrostatic
head of groundwater in the soil, and stability is increased further as the bentonite is forced
into the pores of the soil, gelling once penetration occurs. The bentonite forms a seal on
the surface. However, boulders in soils, such as till, create an almost impossible problem
for slurry face machines. A mixed face of hard rock and coarse soil below the water table
presents a similar dilemma.
Machine tunnelling in rock uses either a roadheader machine or a tunnel boring machine, TBM.
A roadheader generally moves on a tracked base and has a cutting head, usually equipped
with drag picks, mounted on a boom (Fig. 9.13). Twin-boom machines have been developed
in order to increase the rate of excavation. Roadheaders can cut a range of tunnel shapes
and are particularly suited to stratified formations. Some of the heavier roadheaders can
excavate massive rocks with unconfined compressive strengths in excess of 100 MPa and
even up to 200 MPa. Obviously, the cutting performance is influenced by the presence
and character of discontinuities. Basically, excavation by a TBM is accomplished by a cutter
head equipped with an array of suitable cutters, which usually is rotated at a constant speed
and thrust into the tunnel face by a hydraulic pushing system (Fig. 9.14). The stresses imposed
Figure 9.13
Aroad header used at Dinorwic Pumped Storage Scheme, Llanberis, North Wales.
481
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.14
One of the tunnel boring machines used for the construction of the Transfer Tunnel, Lesotho Highlands Water Scheme.
on the surrounding rock by a TBM are much less than those produced during blasting and
therefore damage to the perimeter is minimized and a sensibly smooth face usually is
achieved. What is more, overbreak (see the following text) normally is less during TBM exca-
vation than during drilling and blasting, on average 5% as compared with up to 25% for
conventional methods. This means that less support is required. The rate of tunnel drivage
obviously is an important economic factor in tunnelling, especially in hard rock. Tunnel boring
machines have provided increased rates of advance and so shortened the time taken to com-
plete tunnelling projects. Indeed, they have achieved faster rates of drivage than conven-
tional tunnelling methods in rocks with unconfined compressive strengths of up to 150 MPa.
Consequently, tunnels now are excavated much more frequently by TBMs than by conventional
drill and blast methods. The unconfined compressive strength commonly is one of the most
important properties determining the rate of penetration of a TBM (Castro and Bell, 1995).
The rate of penetration in low-strength rocks is affected by problems of roof support and
instability, as well as gripper problems. Problems associated with rock masses of high
strength are the increased cutter wear and larger thrust (and hence cost) required to induce
rock fracture. The rate of penetration also is influenced by the necessity to replace cutters on
the head of a TBM, which involves downtime. Cutter wear depends, in part, on the abrasive
properties of the rock mass being bored. Whether a rock mass is massive, jointed, fractured,
water bearing, weathered or folded, also affect cutter life. For instance, in hard blocky ground
482
Chapter 9
some cutters are broken by the tremendous impact loads generated during boring. Moreover,
the performance of TBMs is more sensitive to changes in rock properties than conventional
drilling and blasting methods, consequently their use in rock masses that have not been
thoroughly investigated involves high risk. Hence, the decision to use a machine must be
based on a particularly thorough knowledge of the anticipated geological conditions.
Apart from ground stability and support, the most important economic factors in machine
tunnelling in hard rock are cutter costs and penetration rate. The rate of wear is basically
a function of the abrasive characteristics of the rock mass involved. Penetration rate is a function
of cutter geometry, thrust of the machine and the rock strength.
Overbreak refers to the removal of rock material from beyond the payline, the cost of which
has to be met by the contractor. Obviously, every effort must be made to keep overbreak
to a minimum. The amount of overbreak is influenced by the rock type and discontinuities,
as well as the type of excavation.
The conventional method of advancing a tunnel in hard rock is by full-face driving, in which
the complete face is drilled and blasted as a unit. However, full-face driving should be used
with caution where the rocks are variable. The usual alternatives are the top heading and
bench method or the top heading method, whereby the tunnel is worked on an upper and
lower section or heading. The sequence of operations in these three methods is illustrated
in Figure 9.15.
In tunnel blasting, a cut is opened up approximately in the centre of the face in order to pro-
vide a cavity into which subsequent shots can blast. Delay detonation refers to a face being
fired with the shots being detonated in a predetermined sequence. The first shots in the round
blast out the cut, and subsequent shots blast in sequence to form the free face.
Drilling and blasting can damage the rock structure, depending on the properties of the rock
mass and the blasting technique. As far as technique is concerned, attention should be given
to the need to maintain adequate depths of pull, to minimize overbreak and to maintain blast-
ing vibrations below acceptable levels. The stability of a tunnel roof in fissured rocks depends
on the formation of a natural arch, and this is influenced by the extent of disturbance, the
irregularities of the profile and the relationship between tunnel size and fracture pattern. The
amount of overbreak tends to increase with increased depths of pull since drilling inaccura-
cies are magnified. In such situations, not only does the degree of overbreak become very
expensive in terms of grout and concrete backfill but it may give rise to support problems and
subsidence over the crown of the tunnel. However, overbreak can be reduced by accurate
drilling and a carefully controlled scale of blasting. Controlled blasting may be achieved either
by presplitting the face to the desired contour or by smooth blasting.
483
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.15
Tunnelling by drilling and blasting, (a) Full-face, (b) top heading and bench and (c) top heading. Bench drilled horizontally.
Phases: d =drilling; b =blasting; m =mucking; s =scrapping.
In the pre-splitting method, a series of holes is drilled around the perimeter of the tunnel,
loaded with explosives that have a low charging density and detonated before the main blast.
The initial blast develops a fracture that spreads between the holes. Hence, the main blast
leaves an accurate profile. The technique is not particularly suited to slates and schists
because of their respective cleavage and schistosity, Indeed, slates tend to split along, rather
than across their cleavage. Although it is possible to presplit jointed rock masses adequately,
the tunnel profile still is influenced by the pattern of the jointing.
Smooth blasting has proved a more successful technique than presplitting. Here again explo-
sives with a low charging density are used in closely spaced perimeter holes. For example,
the ratio between burden and hole spacing usually is 1:0.8, which means that crack formation
is controlled between the drillholes and hence is concentrated within the final contour. The
holes are fired after the main blast, their purpose being to break away the last fillet of rock
between the main blast and the perimeter. Smooth blasting cannot be carried out without
good drilling precision. Normally, smooth blasting is restricted to the roof and walls of a tunnel
484
Chapter 9
but occasionally it is used in the excavation of the floor. Because fewer cracks are produced
in the surrounding rock, it is stronger and so the desired roof curvature can be maintained
to the greatest possible extent. Hence, the load-carrying capacity of the rock mass is utilized
properly.
Analysis of Tunnel Support
The time a rock mass may remain unsupported in a tunnel is called its stand-up time or bridging
capacity. This mainly depends on the magnitude of the stresses within the unsupported
rock mass, which in their turn depend on its span, strength and discontinuity pattern. If the
bridging capacity of the rock is high, the rock material next to the heading will stay in place
for a considerable time. In contrast, if the bridging capacity is low, the rock will immediately
start to fall at the heading so that supports have to be erected as soon as possible.
The primary support for a tunnel in rock masses excavated by drilling and blasting, in partic-
ular, may be provided by rock bolts (with or without reinforcing wire mesh), shotcrete or steel
arches (Clough, 1981). Rock bolts maintain the stability of an opening by suspending the
dead weight of a slab from the rock above; by providing a normal stress on the rock surface
to clamp discontinuities together and develop beam action; by providing a confining pressure
to increase shearing resistance and develop arch action; and by preventing key blocks from
becoming loosened so that the strength and integrity of the rock mass is maintained.
Shotcrete can be used for lining tunnels. For example, a layer 150 mm thick, around a tunnel
10 m in diameter, can safely carry a load of 500 kPa, corresponding to a burden of approxi-
mately 23 m of rock, more than has ever been observed with rock falls. When combined with
rock bolting and reinforcing wire mesh, shotcrete has proved an excellent temporary support for
all qualities of rock. In very bad cases, steel arches can be used for reinforcement of weaker
tunnel sections.
A classification of rock masses is of primary importance in relation to the design of the type
of tunnel support. Lauffer’s (1958) classification represented an appreciable advance in the
art of tunnelling since it introduced the concept of an active unsupported rock span and the
corresponding stand-up time, both of which are very relevant parameters for determination of
the type and amount of primary support in tunnels. The active span is the width of the tunnel
or the distance from support to the face in cases where this is less than the width of the
tunnel. The relationships found by Lauffer are given in Figure 9.16.
Bieniawski (1974, 1989) maintained that the uniaxial compressive strength of rock material; the
rock quality designation; the spacing, orientation and condition of the discontinuities; and
groundwater inflow were the factors that should be considered in any engineering classification
485
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.16
Geomechanics classification of rock masses for tunnelling. South African case studies are indicated by squares, whereas those
from Alpine countries are shown by dots (after Lauffer, 1958). With kind permission of Springer.
of rock masses. A classification of rock masses based on these parameters is given in
Table 9.4. Each parameter is grouped into five categories, and the categories, are given a
rating. Once determined, the ratings of the individual parameters are summed to give the total
rating or class of the rock mass. The higher the total rating, the better are the rock mass con-
ditions. However, the accuracy of the rock mass rating, RMR, in certain situations may be
open to question. For example, it does not take into account the effects of blasting on rock
masses. Neither does it consider the influence of in situ stress on stand-up time nor the
durability of the rock. The latter can be assessed in terms of the geodurability classification
(see Chapter 3). Nevertheless, Dalgic (2002) suggested that an estimate of the support
pressure, P, could be obtained from the RMR as follows:
i
P = (100 - RMR)g B/100
i b (9.4)
where g is the bulk density of the rock and B is the opening of the excavation.
b
Suitable support measures at times must be adopted to attain a stand-up time longer than
that indicated by the total rating or class of the rock mass. These measures constitute the
486
487
Chapter
9
Table 9.4. The rock mass rating system (geomechanics classification of rock masses) (after Bieniawski, 1989). With kind permission of Wiley
(a) Classification parameters and their ratings
Parameter Range of values
1 Strength of Point-load strength >10 4–10 2–4 1–2 For this low range,
Intact rock Index (MPa) uniaxial compressive
material test is preferred
Uniaxial compressive >250 100–250 50–100 25–50 5–25 1–5 <1
strength (MPa)
Rating 15 12 7 4 2 1 0
2 Drill core quality RQD (%) 90–100 75–90 50–75 25–50 <25
Rating 20 17 13 8 3
3 Spacing of discontinuities >2 m 0.6–2 m 200–600 mm 60–200 mm <60 mm
Rating 20 15 10 8 5
4 Condition of discontinuities Very rough Slightly rough Slightly rough Slickensided Soft gouge >5 mm
surfaces surfaces surfaces surfaces thick
Not continous Separation <1 mm Separation <1 mm or or
No separation Slightly weathered Highly weathered gouge <5 mm separation >5 mm
walls walls thick
Unweathered or continuous
wall rock separation
1–5 mm
continuous
Rating 30 25 20 10 0
5 Groundwater Inflow per 10 m None <10 10–25 25–125 >125
tunnel length (1/min)
or or or or or
Joint water
pressure 0 <0.1 0.1–0.2 0.2–0.5 >0.5
Ratio
Major principle
stess
or or or or or
General conditions Completely dry Damp Wet Dripping Flowing
Rating 15 10 7 4 0
Continued
488 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 9.4. The rock mass rating system (geomechanics classification of rock masses) (after Bieniawski, 1989)—cont’d
(b) Rating adjustment for discontinuity orientations
Parameter Range of values
Strike and dip orientations of Very favourable Favourable Fair Unfavourable Very unfavourable
discontinuties
Ratings Tunnels and mines 0 - 2 - 5 - 10 - 12
Foundations 0 - 2 - 7 - 15 - 25
Slopes 0 - 5 - 25 - 50 - 60
(c) Rock mass classes determined from total ratings
Rating 100¨ 81 80¨ 61 60¨ 41 40¨ 21 <20
Class no. I II III IV V
Description Very good rock Good rock Fair rock Poor rock Very poor rock
(d) Meaning of rock mass classes
Class no. I II III IV V
Average stand-up time 20 yr for 15 m span 1 yr for 10 m span 1 wk for 5 m span 10 h for 2.5 m span 30 min for 1 m span
Cohesion of rock mass (kPa) >400 300–400 200–300 100–200 <100
Friction angle of the rock >45 35–45 25–35 15–25 <15
mass (deg.)
Chapter 9
Table 9.5. Guide for the selection of primary support at shallow depth, size 5–15 m,
construction by drilling and blasting (after Bieniawski, 1974). With kind permission of Balkema
Alternative support systems
Rock Mainly rock bolts (20 mm
mass diameter, length half of
class tunnel width, resin bonded) Mainly shotcrete Mainly steel ribs
I Generally no support required
II Rock bolts spaced 1.5–2 m, Shotcrete 50 mm Uneconomic
plus occasional in crown.
wire mesh
III Rock bolts spaced 1.0–1.5 m Shotcrete 100 mm in Light sets spaced
plus wire mesh crown and 50 mm on 1.5–2 m
and 30 mm shotcrete in sides, plus occasional
crown where required wire mesh and rock
bolts where required
IV Rock bolts spaced 0.5–1.0 m Shotcrete 150 mm in Medium sets spaced
plus wire mesh crown and 100 mm on 0.7–1.5 m plus
and 30–50 mm shotcrete sides plus wire mesh 50 mm shotcrete in
in crown and sides and rock bolts, 3 m crown and sides.
long and spaced 1.5 m
V Not recommended Shotcrete 200 mm in Heavy sets spaced 0.7 m
crown and 150 mm on with lagging. Shotcrete
sides plus wire mesh, 80 mm thick to be
rock bolts and light applied immediately
steel sets. Seal face after blasting
close invert
primary or temporary support. Their purpose is to ensure tunnel stability until the secondary
or permanent support system, for example, a concrete lining, is installed. The form of primary
support depends on depth below the surface, tunnel size and shape, and method of excavation.
Table 9.5 indicates the primary support measures for shallow tunnels 5–12 m in diameterdriven
by drilling and blasting.
Barton et al. (1975) pointed out that Bieniawski (1974), in his analysis of tunnel support, more
or less ignored the roughness of joints, the frictional strength of the joint fillings and the rock
load. They, therefore, proposed the concept of rock mass quality, Q, which could be used as
a means of rock classification for tunnel support (Table 9.6). They defined the rock mass
quality in terms of six parameters:
1. The RQD or an equivalent estimate of joint density.
2. The number of joint sets, J , which is an important indication of the degree of freedom
n
of a rock mass. The RQD and the number of joint sets provide a crude measure of
relative block size.
489
490 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 9.6. Classification of individual parameters used in the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI) tunnelling quality index or “Q” system
(after Barton et al., 1975). With kind permission of the NGI
Description Value Notes
1. Rock quality designation RQD 1. Where RQD is reported or measuredas £ 10 (including 0), a nominal
A Very poor 0–25 valueof 10 is used to evaluate Q
B Poor 25–50 2. RQD intervals of 5, i.e. 100, 95, 90, etc. are sufficiently accurate
C Fair 50–75
D Good 75–90
E Excellent 90–100
2. Joint set number J 1. For intersections, use (3.0 ¥ J )
n n
A Massive, no or few joints 0.5–1.0 2. For portals, use (2.0 ¥ J )
n
B One joint set 2
C One joint set plus random 3
D Two joint sets 4
E Two joint sets plus random 6
F Three joint sets 9
G Three joint sets plus random 12
H Four or more joint sets, random, 15
heavily joined “sugar cube,” etc.
J Crushed rock, earthlike 20
3. Joint roughness number J 1. Add 1.0 if the mean spacing of the relevant joint set is greater
r
(a) Rock wall contact and than 3 m
(b) Rock wall contact before 2. J =0.5 can be used for planar, slickensided joints having lineations,
r
10 cm shear provided the lineations are oriented for minimum strength
A Discontinuous joints 4
B Rough or irregular, undulating 3
C Smooth, undulating 2
D Slickensided, undulating 1.5
E Rough or irregular, undulating 1.5
F Smooth, planar 1.0
G Slickensided, planar 0.5
(c) No rock wall contact when
sheared
491
Chapter
9
H Zone containing clay minerals, thick 1.0
enough to prevent rock wall contact
I Sandy, gravelly or crushed zone, thick
enough to prevent rock wall contact 1.0
4. Joint alteration number J F (approx.) 1. Values of F, the residual friction angle, are intended as an
a r r
(a) Rock wall contact approximate guide to the mineralogical properties of the
A Tightly healed, hard non-softening, 0.75 – alteration products, if present
impermeable filling
B Unaltered joint walls, surface 1.0 (25–35∞)
staining only
C Slightly altered joint walls, non-softening 2.0 (25–30∞)
mineral coatings, sandy particles,
clay-free disintegrated rock etc.
D Silty, or sandy clay coatings, small 3.0 (20–25∞)
clay-fraction (non-softening)
E Softening or low-fraction clay mineral 4.0 (8–16∞)
coatings, i.e. kaolinite, mica. Also
chlorite, talc, gypsum, and graphite, etc.
and small quantities of swelling clays
(discontinuous coatings, 1–2 mm
or less in thickness).
(b) Rock wall contact before
10 cm shear
F Sandy particles, clay-free disintegrated 4.0 (25–30∞)
rock, etc.
G Strongly overconsolidated, 6.0 (16–24∞)
non-softening clay mineral fillings
(continuous, < 5 mm thick)
H Medium or low overconsolidation, 8.0 (12–16∞)
softening, clay mineral fillings
(continuous, < 5 mm thick)
Continued
492 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 9.6. Classification of individual parameters used in the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI) tunnelling quality index or ‘’Q” system
(after Barton et al., 1975)—cont’d
Description Value Notes
J Swelling clay fillings, 8.0–12.0 (6–12∞)
i.e. montmorillonite (continuous
< 5 mm thick). Values of J depend
a
on percentage of swelling clay-size
particles, and access to water
(c) No rock wall contact when
sheared
K Zones or bands of disintegrated 6.0
or crushed rock and clay
L (see G, H, and J for clay, conditions) 8.0
M 8.0–12.0 (6–24∞)
N Zones or bands of silty or sandy clay,
small clay fraction (non-softening) 5.0
O Thick, continuous zones or bands
of clay (see G, H and J for clay
conditions) 10.0–13.0
R 13.0–20.0 (6–24∞)
5. Joint water reduction factor J Approx. water 1. Factors C to F are crude estimates. Increase J if drainage
w w
pressure measures are installed
(kgf/cm2) 2. Special problems caused by ice formation are
A Dry excavations or minor inflow, 1.0 <1.0 not considered
i.e. < 5 l/min locally
B Medium inflow or pressure, 0.66 1.0–2.5
occasional outwash of joint fillings
C Large inflow or high pressure 0.5 2.5–10.0
in competent rock with unfilled joints
D Large inflow or high pressure, 0.33 2.5–10.0
considerable outwash of fillings
E Exceptionally high inflow or pressure 0.2–0.1 >10
at blasting, decaying with time
493
Chapter
9
F Exceptionally high inflow or pressure 0.1–0.05 >10
continuing without decay
6. Stress reduction factor SRF 1. Reduce these values of SRF by 25–50% if the relevant shear
(a) Weakness zones intersecting zones only influence but do not intersect the excavation
excavation, which may cause 2. For strongly anisotropic virgin stress field (if measured): when
loosening of rock mass when tunnel 5£ s/s £ 10, reduce s to 0.8s and s to 0.8s . When
1 3 c c t t
is excavated s/s >10, reduce s and s to 0.6s, and 0.6s where
1 3 c t c t
A Multiple occurrences of weakness 10.0 s = unconfined compressive strength, and s = tensile strength
c t
zones containing clay or chemically (point load) and s and s are the major and minor principal
1 3
distintegrated rock, very loose stresses
surrounding rock (any depth) 3. Few case records available where depth of crown below
B Single weakness zones containing 5.0 surface is less than span width. Suggest SRF increase from
clay, or chemically disintegrated 2.5 to 5 for such cases (see H).
rock (excavation depth < 50 m)
C Single weakness zones containing 2.5
clay, or chemically disintegrated
rock (excavation depth >50 m)
D Multiple shear zones in competent 7.5
rock (clay-free), loose surrounding
rock (any depth)
E Single shear zones in competent 5.0
rock (clay-free) (depth of
excavation < 50 m)
F Single shear zones in competent 2.5
rock (clay-free), (depth of
excavation > 50 m)
G Loose open joints, heavily jointed 5.0
or “sugar cube” (any depth)
(b) Competent rock, rock-stress s/s s /s SRF c 1 t 1
problems
H Low stress, near surface >200 >13 2.5
J Medium stress 200–10 13–0.66 1.0
K High stress, very tight structure 10–5 0.66–0.33 0.5–2
(usually favourable to stability, may
be unfavourable for wall stability)
Continued
494 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 9.6. Classification of individual parameters used in the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI) tunnelling quality index or “Q” system
(after Barton et al., 1975)—cont’d
Description Value SRF
L Mild rock burst (massive rock) 5–2.5 0.33–0.16 5–10
M Heavy rock burst (massive rock) < 2.5 < 0.16 10–20
(c) Squeezing rock, plastic flow of
incompetent rock under the
influence of high rock pressure
N Mild squeezing-rock pressure 5–10
O Heavy squeezing-rock pressure 10–20
(d) Swelling rock, chemical swelling
activity depending on presence
of water
P Mild swelling-rock pressure 5–10
R Heavy swelling-rock pressure 10–20
Additional notes on the use of these tables
When making estimates of the rock mass quality (Q) the following guidelines should be followed, in addition to the notes listed in the tables:
1. When drillhole core is unavailable, RQD can be estimated from the number of joints per unit volume, in which the number of joints per metre for each
joint set are added. A simple relation can be used to convert this number to RQD for the case of clay-free rock masses: RQD =115 – 3.3 J. (approx.)
v
where J =total number of joints per m3(RQD =100 for J <4.5).
v v
2. The parameter J representing the number of joint sets will often be affected by foliation, schistosity, slaty cleavage, or bedding. etc. If strongly developed
n
these parallel joints should obviously be counted as a complete joint set. However, if there are few joints visible, or only occasional breaks in the core
due to these features, then it will he more appropriate to count them as “random” when evaluating J.
n
3. The parameters J and J (representing shear strength) should be relevant to the weakest significant joint set or clay-filled discontinuity in the given
r a
zone. However, if the joint set or discontinuity with the minimum value of (J/J) is favourably oriented for stability, then a second, less favourably
r a
oriented joint set or discontinuity may sometimes be more significant, and its higher value of J/J should be used when evaluatitig Q. The value of
r a
J/J should in fact relate to the surface most likely to allow failure to initiate.
r a
4. When a rock mass contains clay, the factor SRF appropriate to loosening loads should be evaluated. In such cases the strength of the intact rock is
of little interest. However, when jointing is minimal and clay is completely absent the strength of the intact rock may become the weakest link, and the
stability will then depend on the ratio rock-stress/rock-strength. A strongly anisotropic stress field is unfavourable for stability and is roughly accounted
for as in note 2 in the table for stress reduction factor evaluation.
5. The compressive and tensile strengths (s and s) of the intact rock should be evaluated in the saturated condition if this is appropriate to present
c t
or future in situ conditions. A very conservative estimate of strength should be made for those rocks that deteriorate when exposed to moist or
saturated conditions.
Chapter 9
3. The roughness of the most unfavourable joint set, J. The joint roughness and the
r
number of joint sets determine the dilatancy of the rock mass.
4. The degree of alteration or filling of the most unfavourable joint set, J . The roughness
a
and degree of alteration of the joint walls or filling materials provide an approximation
of the shear strength of the rock mass.
5. The degree of water seepage, J .
w
6. The stress reduction factor, SRF, which accounts for the loading on a tunnel caused
either by loosening loads in the case of clay-bearing rock masses, or unfavourable
stress–strength ratios in the case of massive rock. Squeezing and swelling also are
taken account of in the SRF.
They provided a rock mass description and ratings for each of the six parameters that enabledthe
rock mass quality, Q, to be derived from:
RQD J J
Q= ¥ r¥ w
J J SRF
n a (9.5)
The numerical value of Q ranges from 0.001 for exceptionally poor-quality squeezing
ground, to 1000 for exceptionally good-quality rock (practically unjointed). Rock mass
quality, together with the support pressure and the dimensions and purpose of the under-
ground excavation are used to estimate the type of suitable permanent support. A four-
fold change in rock mass quality indicates the need for a different support system.
Zones of different rock mass quality are mapped and classified separately. However,
in variable conditions where different zones occur within a tunnel, each for only a few
metres, it is more economic to map the overall quality and to estimate an average value
of rock mass quality, from which a design of a compromise support system can be made
(Barton, 1988).
The Q value is related to the type and amount of support by deriving the equivalent dimen-
sions of the excavation. The latter is related to the size and purpose of the excavation, and
isobtained from:
Spanorheightofwaall
Equivalentdimension= (9.6)
ESR
where ESR is the excavation support ratio related to the use of the excavation and the degree
of safety required. Some values of ESR are shown in Table 9.7.
Stacey and Page (1986) made use of the Q system to develop design charts to determine
the factor of safety for unsupported excavations, the spacing of rock bolts over the face of an
495
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Table 9.7. Equivalent support ratio for different excavations
Excavation category ESR
1. Temporary mine openings 3–5
2. Vertical shafts
Circular section 2.5
Rectangular/square section 2.0
3. Permanent mine openings, water tunnels for hydropower (excluding
high-pressure penstocks), pilot tunnels, drifts and headings for large
excavations 1.6
4. Storage caverns, water treatment plants, minor highway and railroad
tunnels, surge chambers, access tunnels 1.4
5. Power stations, major highway or railroad tunnels, civil defence chambers,
portals, intersections 1.0
6. Underground nuclear power stations, railroad, stations, factories 0.8
excavation and the thickness of shotcrete on an excavation (Figs. 9.17a, b and c, respectively).
For civil engineering applications, a factor of safety exceeding 1.2 is required if the omission
of support is to be considered. The support values suggested in the charts are for primary
support. The values should be doubled for long-term support.
Underground Caverns
The site investigation for an underground cavern has to locate a sufficiently large mass
of sound rock in which the cavern can be excavated. Because caverns usually are located
at appreciable depth below ground surface, the rock mass often is beneath the influence
of weathering and consequently the chief considerations are rock quality, geological structure
and groundwater conditions. The orientation of an underground cavern usually is based on
an analysis of the joint pattern, including the character of the different joint systems in the
area and, where relevant, also on the basis of the stress distribution. It normally is considered
necessary to avoid an orientation whereby the long axis of a caverrn is parallel to steeply
inclined major joint sets (Hoek and Brown, 1980). Wherever possible, caverns should be
orientated so that fault zones are avoided.
Displacement data provide a direct means of evaluating cavern stability. Displacements that
have exceeded the predicted elastic displacements by a factor of 5–10 generally have resulted
in decisions to modify support and excavation methods. In a creep-sensitive material, such as
may occur in a major shear zone or zone of soft altered rock, the natural stresses concen-
trated around an opening cause time-dependent displacements that, if restrained by
support, result in a build-up of stress on the support. Conversely, if a rock mass is not sensitive
to creep, stresses around an opening normally are relieved as blocks displace towards
496
Figure 9.17
(a) Relationship between unsupported span and Qvalue (b) Bolt spacing estimation using the Qsystem, bolt spacing - m2of
excavation per bolt, where the area per bolt is greater than 6 m2, spot bolting is implied. (c) Shotcrete and wire mesh support
estimation using the Qsystem. Thickness of shotcrete in millimetres (mesh reinforcement in the shaded areas). Note that the
very thick applications of shotcrete are not practical but values are included for completeness (after Stacey and Page, 1986).
The support intensity in design charts (b) and (c) is appropriate for primary support; where long-term support is required, the design
chart values should be modified as follows: (i) divide area per bolt by 2; (ii) multiple shotcrete thickness by 2. FOS = factor of safety.
497
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
the opening. However, initial movements may be influenced by the natural stresses concen-
trated around an opening and under certain boundary conditions may continue to act even
after large displacements have occurred.
The angle of friction for tight irregular joint surfaces commonly is greater than 45∞and, as
a consequence, the included angle of any wedge opening into the roof of a cavern has to be
90∞or more, if the wedge is to move into the cavern. A tight rough joint system therefore
only presents a problem when it intersects the surface of a cavern at relatively small angles
or is parallel to the surface of the cavern. However, if material occupying a thick shear zone
has been reduced to its residual strength, then the angle of friction could be as low as 15∞
and, in such an instance, the included angle of a wedge would be 30∞. Such a situation would
give rise to a very deep wedge that could move into a cavern. Displacement of wedges into
a cavern is enhanced if the ratio of the intact unconfined compressive strength to the natural
stresses concentrated around the cavern is low. Values of less than 5 are indicative of stress
conditions in which new extension fractures develop about a cavern during its excavation.
Wedge failures are facilitated by shearing and crushing of the asperities along discontinuities
as wedges are displaced.
The walls of a cavern may be influenced by the prevailing state of stress, especially if the
tangential stresses concentrated around the cavern approach the intact compressive
strength of the rock (Gercek and Genis, 1999). In such cases, extension fractures develop
near the surface of the cavern as it is excavated and cracks produced by blast damage
become more pronounced. The problem is accentuated if any lineation structures or discon-
tinuities run parallel with the walls of the cavern. Indeed, popping of slabs of rock may take
place from cavern walls.
Rock bursts have occurred in underground caverns at rather shallow depths, particularly where
they were excavated in the sides of valleys and on the inside of faults when the individualfault
passed through a cavern and dipped towards an adjacent valley. Bursting can take place at
depths of 200–300 m, when the tensile strength of the rocks varies between 3 and 4 MPa.
Three methods of blasting normally are used to excavate underground caverns (Fig. 9.18).
Firstly, in the overhead tunnel, the entire profile is drilled and blasted together or in parts
by horizontal holes. Secondly, benching with horizontal drilling may be used to excavate the
central parts of a large cavern. Thirdly, the bottom of a cavern may be excavated by bench-
ing, the blastholes being drilled vertically. The central part of a cavern also can be excavated
by vertical benching, provided that the upper part has been excavated to a sufficient height
or that the walls of the cavern are inclined. Indeed, once the crown of a cavern has been
excavated, it may be more economical to excavate the walls in a series of large deep bench
cuts exposing substantial areas of wall in a single blast. Under these conditions, however,
498
Chapter 9
Figure 9.18
Main stages in the excavation of underground caverns.
an unstable wedge can be exposed and fail before it is supported. Smooth blasting is used
to minimize fragmentation in the surrounding rock.
The support pressures required to maintain the stability of a cavern increase as its span
increases so that for larger caverns, standard-sized bolts arranged in normal patterns may
not be sufficient to hold the rock in place. Most caverns have arched crowns with span to rise
ratios, B/R, of 2.5–5.0. In general, higher support pressures are required for flatter roofs.
Frequently, the upper parts of the walls are more heavily bolted in order to help support the
haunches and the roof arch, whereas the lower walls may be either slightly bolted or even
unbolted (Hoek et al., 1995).
Shafts and Raises
The geological investigation prior to shaft sinking or raise construction should provide
detailed information relating to the character of the ground conditions. The hydrogeological
conditions, that is, position of the water table, hydrostatic pressures, especially artesian pres-
sures, location of inflow and its quantification, as well as chemical composition of the water,
are obviously of paramount importance. Indeed, groundwater inflow from deep aquifers pres-
ents a major hazard in shaft sinking operations since hydrostatic pressure increases with
depth. The investigation also should provide detailed information relating to the character
of the rocks involved, noting, where appropriate, their fracture index, strength, porosity and
permeability. The data obtained should enable the best method of construction and the
499
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
design of the lining to be made. In addition, the data should indicate where any ground sta-
bility and groundwater control measures are needed. Hence, a drillhole should be cored
along the full length of the centre-line of a shaft and appropriate down-hole tests conducted.
According to Auld (1992), the best shape of a shaft lining to resist loads imposed by rock defor-
mation and hydrostatic pressure, particularly one that is deep and has a large cross-sectional
area, is circular since the induced stresses in the lining are all compressional. The circular
shape minimizes the effect of inward radial closure exhibited by rock masses under high
overburden stresses. In fact, no pressure is applied to the lining of a shaft in strong competent
rock masses as inward deformation is minimal, being compatible with the elastic properties
of the rock. Consequently, the design of shaft linings normally does not allow for rock loading
when shafts are sunk in strong competent rock masses. However, the hydrostatic pressures
must be taken into account in shaft design.
A shaft is driven vertically downwards, whereas a raise is driven either vertically or at steep
angle upwards. Excavation is either by drilling and blasting or by a shaft boring machine.
In shaft sinking, drilling usually is easier than in tunnelling but blasting is against gravity
and mucking is slow and therefore expensive. In contrast, mucking and blasting are simpler
in raising operations but drilling is difficult. A raise is of small cross-sectional area, if the exca-
vation is to have a large diameter, then enlargement is done from above, the primary raise
excavation being used as a muck shute. Where a raise emerges at the surface through
unconsolidated material, this section is excavated from the surface. Shaft boring machines
can either excavate a shaft downwards to its required diameter in a single pass or a small
diameter shaft can be excavated that subsequently is reamed, from the top or bottom, to the
required size. Rock bolts and wire mesh or rock bolts, wire mesh and shotcrete may be used
for temporary support. Liner plates, pre-cast concrete segments or fabricated steel tubbing
may be used for temporary support in weak ground conditions. The temporary lining is installed
as shaft sinking proceeds. The permanent lining is constructed from the top down, however,
if temporary support has been used, then the permanent lining may be installed from the
bottom up.
A shaft usually will sink through a series of different rock types, and the two principal problems
likely to be encountered are varying stability of the walls and ingress of water. Indeed, these
two problems frequently occur together, and they are likely to be met with in rock masses
with a high fracture index, weak zones being particularly hazardous. They are most serious,
however, in unconsolidated deposits, especially loosely packed gravels, sands and silts.
The position of the water table is highly significant, as is the pore water pressure.
A simple and effective method of dealing with groundwater in shaft sinking is to pump from
a sump within the shaft. However, problems arise when the quantity pumped is so large that
500
Chapter 9
the rate of inflow under high head causes instability in the sides of the shaft or prevents the fixing
and back-grouting of the shaft lining. Although the idea of surrounding a shaft by a ring of bored
wells is at first sight attractive, there are practical difficulties in achieving effective lowering of the
water table. In fissured rock masses or variable water bearing soils, there is a tendency for the
water flow to by-pass the wells and take preferential paths directly into the excavation.
Where the stability of the wall and/or the ingress of water are likely to present problems, one
of the most frequent techniques resorted to in shaft sinking is ground freezing. Freezing
transforms weak waterlogged materials into ones that are self-supporting and impervious.
Therefore, it affords temporary support to an excavation as well as being a means of excluding
groundwater. Normally, the freeze probes are laid out in linear fashion so that an adequate
boundary wall encloses the future excavation when the radial development of ice about each
probe unites to form a continuous section of frozen ground. The usual coolant is brine,
although liquid nitrogen is used in special circumstances.
Ground freezing means heat transfer and, in the absence of moving groundwater, this is
brought about by conduction. Thus, the thermal conductivities of the materials involved
govern the rate at which freezing proceeds. These values fall within quite narrow limits for all
types of frozen ground. This is why ground freezing is a versatile technique and can deal with
a variety of soil and rock types in a stratal sequence. But a limitation is placed on the freezing
process by the unidirectional flow of groundwater. For a brine-freezing project, a velocity
exceeding 2 m per day will seriously affect and distort the growth of an ice wall. The tolerance
is much wider when liquid nitrogen is used.
Grouting can be an economical method of eliminating or reducing the flow of groundwater
into shafts if the soil or rock conditions are suitable for accepting cement or chemical grouts.
This is because the perimeter of the grouted zone is relatively small in relation to the depth
of the excavation.
Reservoirs
There are a range of factors that influence the feasibility and economics of a proposed reservoir
site. The most important of these is generally the location of the dam. After that, consideration
must be given to the run-off characteristics of the catchment area, the watertightness of the
proposed reservoir basin, the stability of the valley sides, the likely rate of sedimentation in
the new reservoir, the quality of the water and, if it is to be a very large reservoir, the possibility
of associated seismic activity. Once these factors have been assessed, they must be weighed
against the present land use and social factors. The purposes that the reservoir will servemust
also be taken into account in such a survey.
501
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Although most reservoirs today serve multiple purposes, their principal function, no matter what
their size, is to stabilize the flow of water, firstly, to satisfy a varying demand from consumers
and, secondly, to regulate water supplied to a river course. In other words, water is stored at times
of excess flow to conserve it for later release at times of low flow, or to reduce flood damage
downstream.
The most important physical characteristic of a reservoir is its storage capacity. Probably
the most important aspect of storage in reservoir design is the relationship between capacity
and yield. The yield is the quantity of water that a reservoir can supply at any given time. The
maximum possible yield equals the mean inflow less evaporation and seepage loss. In any
consideration of yield, the maximum quantity of water that can be supplied during a critical
dry period (i.e. during the lowest natural flow on record) is of prime importance and is defined
as the safe yield.
The maximum elevation to which the water in a reservoir basin rises during ordinary operating
conditions is referred to as the top water or normal pool level. For most reservoirs, this is fixed
by the top of the spillway. Conversely, minimum pool level is the lowest elevation to which
the water is drawn under normal conditions, this being determined by the lowest outlet.
Between these two levels, the storage volume is termed the useful storage, whereas the water
below the minimum pool level, because it cannot be drawn upon, is the dead storage. During
floods, the water level may rise above top water level but this surcharge cannot be retained
since it is above the elevation of the spillway.
Problems may emerge both upstream and downstream in any adjustment of a river regime
to the new conditions imposed by a reservoir. Deposition around the head of a reservoir may
cause serious aggradation upstream, resulting in a reduced capacity of the stream channels
to contain flow. Hence, flooding becomes more frequent, and the water table rises. Removal
of sediment from the outflow of a reservoir can lead to erosion in the river regime downstream
of the dam, with consequent acceleration of headward erosion in tributaries and lowering ofthe
water table.
Investigation of Reservoir Sites
In an investigation of a proposed reservoir site, consideration must be given to the amount
of rainfall, run-off, infiltration and evapotranspiration that occurs in the catchment area, as
well as to the geological conditions. The climatic and topographical conditions therefore are
important, as is the type of vegetative cover. Accordingly, the two essential types of basic
data needed for reservoir design studies are adequate topographical maps and hydrological
records. Indeed, the location of a large impounding direct supply reservoir is influenced very
502
Chapter 9
much by topography since this governs its storage capacity. Initial estimates of storage
capacity can be made from topographic maps or aerial photographs, more accurate information
being obtained, where necessary, from subsequent surveying. Catchment areas and drainage
densities can also be determined from maps and airphotos.
Reservoir volume can be estimated, firstly, by planimetering areas upstream of the dam
site for successive contours up to proposed top water level. Secondly, the area between two
successive contours is multiplied by the contour interval to give the interval volume, the
summation of the interval volumes providing the total volume of the reservoir site.
Records of stream flow are required for determining the amount of water available for storage
purposes. Such records contain flood peaks and volumes that are used to determine the
amount of storage needed to control floods, and to design spillways and other outlets.
Records of rainfall are used to supplement stream flow records or as a basis for computing stream
flow where there are no flow records obtainable. Losses due to seepage and evaporation also
must be taken into account.
The field reconnaissance provides indications of the areas where detailed geological
mapping may be required and where to locate drillholes, such as in low narrow saddles
or other seemingly critical areas in the reservoir rim. Drillholes on the flanks of reservoirs
should be drilled at least to the proposed floor level. Permeability and pore water tests can
be carried out in these drillholes.
Leakage from Reservoirs
The most attractive site for a large impounding reservoir is a valley constricted by a gorge
at its outfall with steep banks upstream so that a small dam can impound a large volume
of water with a minimum extent of water spread. However, two other factors have to be taken
into consideration, namely, the watertightness of the basin and bank stability. The question
of whether or not significant water loss will take place is determined chiefly by the groundwater
conditions, more specifically by the hydraulic gradient. Accordingly, once the groundwater
conditions have been investigated, an assessment can be made of watertightness and
possible groundwater control measures.
Leakage from a reservoir takes the form of sudden increases in stream flow downstream of the
dam site with boils in the river and the appearance of springs on the valley sides. It may be
associated with major defects in the geological structure, such as solution channels, fault zones
or buried channels through which large and essentially localized flows take place. Seepage is
a more discreet flow, spread out over a larger area but may be no less in total amount.
503
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
The economics of reservoir leakage vary. Although a leaky reservoir may be acceptable in
an area where run-off is distributed evenly throughout the year, a reservoir basin with the
same rate of water loss may be of little value in an area where run-off is seasonally deficient.
A river-regulating scheme can operate satisfactorily despite some leakage from a reservoir,
and reservoirs used largely for flood control may be effective even if they are very leaky.
In contrast, leakage from a pumped storage reservoir must be assessed against pumping costs.
Serious water loss has led, in some instances, to the abandonment of reservoirs. Such examples
include the Jerome Reservoir in Idaho, the Cedar Reservoir in Washington, the Monte Jacques
Reservoir in Spain, the Hales Bar Reservoir in Tennessee and the Hondo Reservoir in New York.
Apart from the conditions in the immediate vicinity of the dam, the two factors that determine
the retention of water in reservoir basins are the piezometric conditions in, and the natural
permeability of, the floor and flanks of the basin. Knill (1971) pointed out that four groundwater
conditions existed on the flanks of a reservoir, namely:
1. The groundwater divide and piezometric level are at a higher elevation than that
of the proposed top water level. In this situation, no significant water loss takes place.
2. The groundwater divide, but not the piezometric level, is above the top water level
of the reservoir. In these circumstances, seepage can take place through a separating
ridge into an adjoining valley. Deep seepage can take place, but the rate of flow is
determined by the in situ permeability.
3. Both the groundwater divide and piezometric level are at a lower elevation than the
top water level but higher than that of the reservoir floor. In this case, the increase
in groundwater head is low, and the flow from the reservoir may be initiated under
conditions of low piezometric pressure in the reservoir flanks.
4. The water table is depressed below the base of the reservoir floor. This indicates
deep drainage of the rock mass or very limited recharge. A depressed water table
does not necessarily mean that reservoir construction is out of the question but
groundwater recharge will take place on filling that will give rise to a changed hydro-
geological environment as the water table rises. In such instances, the impermeability
of the reservoir floor is important. When permeable beds are more or less saturated,
particularly when they have no outlet, seepage is decreased appreciably. At the same
time, the accumulation of silt on the floor of a reservoir tends to reduce seepage.
If, however, the permeable beds contain large pore spaces or discontinuities
and they drain from the reservoir, then seepage continues.
Troubles from seepage usually can be controlled by exclusion or drainage techniques.
Cut-off trenches, carried into bedrock, may be constructed across cols occupied by permeable
deposits. Grouting may be effective where localized fissuring is the cause of leakage.
504
Chapter 9
Impervious linings consume large amounts of head near the source of water, thereby
reducing hydraulic gradients and saturation at the points of exit and increasing resistance to
seepage loss. Clay blankets or layers of silt have been used to seal exits from reservoirs.
Because of the occurrence of permeable contacts, close jointing, pipes, and the possible
presence of tunnels and cavities, recent accumulations of basaltic lava flows can prove highly
leaky rocks with respect to watertightness. Lava flows frequently are interbedded, often in an
irregular fashion, with pyroclastic deposits. Deposits of ash and cinders tend to be highly
permeable.
Reservoir sites in limestone terrains vary considerably in their suitability. Massive horizontally
bedded limestones, relatively free from solution features, form excellent sites. On the other
hand, well-jointed, cavernous and deformed limestones are likely to present problems in
terms of stability and watertightness. Serious leakage usually has taken place as a result of
cavernous conditions that are not fully revealed or appreciated at the site investigation stage.
Indeed, sites are best abandoned where large numerous solution cavities extend to consid-
erable depths. Where the problem is not so severe, solution cavities can be cleaned and
grouted (Kannan, 2003). In addition, reference has been made by Milanovic (2003) to the
application of a blanket of shotcrete to seal areas of karstic rock in reservoir basins. However,
wet rock surfaces are not suitable as far as the application of shotcrete is concerned and
neither is it wise to allow groundwater pressure to build up beneath shotcrete.
Sinkholes and caverns can develop in thick beds of gypsum more rapidly than they can
in limestone. Indeed, in the United States, they have been known to form within a few years
in areas where beds of gypsum are located below reservoirs. Extensive surface cracking and
subsidence has occurred in Oklahoma and New Mexico due to the collapse of cavernous
gypsum. The problem is accentuated by the fact that gypsum is weaker than limestone and,
therefore, collapses more readily. Uplift is a problem that has been associated with the hydration
of anhydrite beneath reservoirs.
Buried channels may be filled with coarse granular stream deposits or deposits of glacial
origin and, if they occur near the perimeter of a reservoir, they almost invariably pose leakage
problems. Indeed, leakage through buried channels, via the perimeter of a reservoir, is usually
more significant than through the main valley. Hence, the bedrock profile, the type of deposits
and groundwater conditions should be determined.
A thin layer of relatively impermeable superficial material does not necessarily provide an
adequate seal against seepage. A controlling factor in such a situation is the groundwater
pressure immediately below the blanket. Where artesian conditions exist, springs may break
the thinner parts of the superficial cover. If the water table below such a blanket is depressed,
505
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
then there is a risk that the weight of water in the reservoir may puncture it. What is more, on
filling a reservoir, there is a possibility that the superficial material may be ruptured or partially
removed to expose the underlying rocks. This happened at the Monte Jacques Reservoir
in northern Spain where alluvial deposits covered cavernous limestone. The alluvium was
washed away to expose a large sinkhole down which reservoir water escaped.
Leakage along faults generally is not a serious problem as far as reservoirs are concerned
since the length of the flow path usually is too long. However, fault zones occupied by
permeable fault breccia that extend from the reservoir to run beneath the dam must be given
special consideration. When the reservoir basin is filled, the hydrostatic pressure may cause
removal of loose material from such fault zones and thereby accentuate leakage. Permeable
fault zones can be grouted, or if a metre or so wide, excavated and filled with rolled clay
or concrete.
Stability of the Sides of Reservoirs
The formation of a reservoir upsets the groundwater regime and represents an obstruction to
water flowing downhill. The greatest change involves the raising of the water table. Some soils
or rocks, which formerly were not within the zone of saturation, may become unstable and
fail, as saturated material is weaker than unsaturated. This can lead to slumping and sliding
on the flanks of a reservoir (Riemer, 1995). In glaciated valleys, morainic material often rests
on a rock slope smoothed by glacial erosion, which accentuates the problem of slip. Landslides
that occur after a reservoir is filled reduce its capacity. Also, ancient landslipped areas that
occur on the rims of a reservoir may present a leakage hazard and could be reactivated.
The worst man-induced landslide on record took place in the Vajont Reservoir in northern
Italy in 1963 (Semenza. and Ghirotti, 2000). More than 300 ¥ 106 m3 moved downhill with
such momentum that it crossed the 99 m wide gorge and rode 135 m up the opposite side.
It filled the reservoir for a distance of 2 km with slide material, which in places reached heights
of 175 m and displaced water in the reservoir, thereby generating huge waves that overtopped
both abutments to a height of some 100 m above the crest of the dam.
Sedimentation in Reservoirs
Although it is seldom a decisive factor in determining location, sedimentation in reservoirs is
an important problem in some countries (De Souza et al., 1998). For example, investigations
in the United States suggest that sedimentation will limit the usefulness of most reservoirs to
less than 200 years. Sedimentation in a reservoir may lead to one or more of its major functions
506
Chapter 9
being seriously curtailed or even to it becoming inoperative. For instance, Tate and Farquharson
(2000) noted that the useful life of Tabela Reservoir on the River Indus, Pakistan, is threatened
by a sediment delta that is approaching the intake tunnels of the dam. In a small reservoir,
sedimentation may affect the available carry-over water supply seriously and ultimately
necessitate abandonment.
In those areas where streams carry heavy sediment loads, the rates of sedimentation must
be estimated accurately in order that the useful life of any proposed reservoir may be determined.
The volume of sediment carried varies with stream flow, but usually the peak sediment load will
occur prior to the peak stream flow discharge. Frequent sampling accordingly must be made
to ascertain changes in sediment transport. Volumetric measurements of sediment in reser-
voirs are made by soundings taken to develop the configuration of the reservoir sides and
bottom below the water surface.
Size of a drainage basin is the most important consideration as far as sediment yield is
concerned, the rock types, drainage density and gradient of slope also being important. The
sediment yield also is influenced by the amount and seasonal distribution of precipitation and
the vegetative cover. Poor cultivation practices, overgrazing, improper disposal of mine waste
and other human activities may accelerate erosion or contribute directly to stream loads.
The ability of a reservoir to trap and retain sediment is known as its trap efficiency and is
expressed as the percentage of incoming sediment that is retained. Trap efficiency depends
on total inflow, rate of flow, sediment characteristics and the size of the reservoir.
Dams and Dam Sites
The type and size of dam constructed depends on the need for and the amount of water avail-
able, the topography and geology of the site, and the construction materials that are readily
obtainable. Dams can be divided into two major categories according to the type of material
with which they are constructed, namely, concrete dams and earth dams. The former category
can be subdivided into gravity, arch and buttress dams, whereas rolled fill and rockfill
embankments comprise the other. As far as dam construction is concerned, safety must be the
primary concern, this coming before cost. Safety requires that the foundations and abutments
be adequate for the type of dam selected.
A gravity dam is a rigid monolithic structure that is usually straight in plan, although sometimes
it may be slightly curved. Its cross section is roughly trapezoidal. Generally, gravity dams can
tolerate only the smallest differential movements, and their resistance to dislocation by the hydro-
static pressure of the reservoir water is due to their own weight. A favourable site is usually one
507
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
in a constricted area of a valley where sound bedrock is reasonably close to the surface, both
in the floor and abutments.
An arch dam consists of a concrete wall, of high-strength concrete, curved in plan, with its
convex face pointing upstream (Fig. 9.19). Arch dams are relatively thin walled and lighter in
weight than gravity dams. They stand up to large deflections in the foundation rock, provided
that the deflections are uniformly distributed. They transmit most of the horizontal thrust
of the reservoir water to the abutments by arch action and this, together with their relative
Figure 9.19
Hoover Dam, Colorado, completed in the 1930s but still one of the largest and most impressive arch dams in the world.
508
Chapter 9
thinness, means that they impose high stresses on narrow zones at the base, as well as the
abutments of the dam. Therefore, the strength of the rock mass at the abutments, and below
and immediately down-valley of the dam must be unquestionable, and the modulus of
elasticity must be high enough to ensure that its deformation under thrust from the arch is
not so great as to induce excessive stresses in the arch. Ideal locations for arch dams are
provided by narrow gorges where the walls are capable of withstanding the thrust produced
by the arch action.
Buttress dams provide an alternative to other concrete dams in locations where the foundation
rocks are competent. A buttress dam consists principally of a slab of reinforced concrete that
slopes upstream and is supported by a number of buttresses whose axes are normal to the
slab (Fig. 9.20). The buttresses support the slab and transmit the water load to the foundation.
They are rather narrow and act as heavily loaded walls, thus exerting substantial unit pressures
on the foundations.
Earth dams are embankments of earth with an impermeable core to control seepage (Fig. 9.21).
This usually consists of clayey material. If sufficient quantities are not available, then concrete
or asphaltic concrete membranes are used. The core normally is extended as a cut-off
or grout curtain below ground level when seepage beneath the dam has to be controlled.
Figure 9.20
Errochty Dam, Scotland, an example of a buttress dam.
509
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.21
Harddap Dam, near Mariental, Namibia, and example of an embankment dam.
Drains of sand and/or gravel installed beneath or within the dam also afford seepage control.
Because of their broad base, earth dams impose much lower stresses on the foundation
materials than concrete dams. Furthermore, they can accommodate deformation such as that
due to settlement more readily. As a consequence, earth dams have been constructed on
a great variety of foundations ranging from weak unconsolidated stream or glacial deposits
to high-strength rocks.
An earth dam may be zoned or homogeneous, the former type being more common. A zoned
dam is a rolled fill dam composed of several zones that increase in permeability from the core
towards the outer slopes. The number of zones depends on the type and amount of borrow
material available. Stability of a zoned dam is due mostly to the weight of the heavy
outer zones.
If there is only one type of borrow material readily available, a homogeneous embankment
is constructed. In other words, homogeneous dams are constructed entirely or almost entirely
of one type of material. The latter is usually fine-grained, although sand and sand–gravel
mixtures have been used.
Rockfill dams usually consist of three basic elements — a loose rockfill dump, which forms the
bulk of the dam and resists the thrust of the reservoir; an impermeable facing or membrane
510
Chapter 9
on the upstream side or an impermeable core; and rubble masonry in between to act as
a cushion for the membrane and to resist destructive deflections. Consolidation of the main
rock body may leave the face unsupported with the result that cracks form through which
seepage can occur. Flexible asphalt membranes overcome this problem.
Some sites that are geologically unsuitable for a specific type of dam design may support
one of composite design. For example, a broad valley that has strong rocks on one side and
weaker ones on the other possibly can be spanned by a combined gravity and embankment
dam, that is, a composite dam (Fig. 9.22).
The construction of a dam and the filling of a reservoir behind it impose a load on the sides
and floor of a valley, creating new stress conditions. These stresses must be analyzed so that
there is ample assurance that there will be no possibility of failure. A concrete dam behaves
as a rigid monolithic structure, the stress acting on the foundation being a function of the
Figure 9.22
Cow Green Dam in Teesdale, northeast England, an example of a composite dam.
511
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
weight of the dam as distributed over the total area of the foundation. In contrast, an earthfill
dam exhibits semi-plastic behaviour, and the pressure on the foundation at any point
depends on the thickness of the dam above that point. Vertical static forces act downward
and include both the weight of the structure and the water, although a large part of the
dam is submerged and, therefore, the buoyancy effect reduces the influence of the load.
The most important dynamic forces acting on a dam are wave action, overflow of water and
seismic shocks.
Horizontal forces are exerted on a dam by the lateral pressure of water behind it. These,
if excessive, may cause concrete dams to slide. The tendency towards sliding at the base
of such dams is of particular significance in fissile rocks such as shales, slates and phyllites.
Weak zones, such as interbedded ashes in a sequence of basalt lava flows, can prove
troublesome. The presence of flat-lying joints may destroy much of the inherent
shear strength of a rock mass and reduce the problem of resistance of a foundation to
horizontal forces to one of sliding friction, so that the roughness of joint surfaces becomes
a critical factor. The rock surface should be roughened to prevent sliding, and keying
the dam some distance into the foundation is advisable. Another method of reducing
sliding is to give a downward slope to the base of the dam in the upstream direction of
the valley.
Variations in pore water pressure cause changes in the state of stress in rock masses. They
reduce the compressive strength of rocks and cause an increase in the amount of deformation
they undergo. Pore water also may be responsible for swelling in certain rocks and for
acceleration in their rate of alteration. Pore water in the stratified rocks of a dam foundation
reduces the coefficient of friction between the individual beds, and between the foundation
and the dam.
Percolation of water through the foundations of concrete dams, even when the rock masses
concerned are of good quality and low permeability, is a decisive factor in the safety and
performance of such dams. Such percolation can remove filler material that may be occupying
joints that, in turn, can lead to differential settlement of the foundations. It also may open
joints, which decreases the strength of the rock mass.
In highly permeable rock masses, excessive seepage beneath a dam may damage the
foundation. Seepage rates can be lowered by reducing the hydraulic gradient beneath
the dam by incorporating a cut-off into the design. A cut-off lengthens the flow path, reducing
the hydraulic gradient. It extends to an impermeable horizon or some specified depth and
usually is located below the upstream face of the dam. The rate of seepage also can be effec-
tively reduced by placing an impervious earthfill against the lower part of the upstream face
of a dam.
512
Chapter 9
Uplift pressure acts against the base of a dam and is caused by water seeping beneath it that
is under hydrostatic head from the reservoir. Uplift pressure should be distinguished from the
pore water pressure in the material beneath a dam. The uplift pressure on the heel of a dam
is equal to the depth of the foundation below water level multiplied by the unit weight of
the water. In the simplest case, it is assumed that the difference in hydraulic heads between the
heel and the toe of the dam is dissipated uniformly between them. The uplift pressure can be
reduced by allowing water to be conducted downstream by drains incorporated into the
foundation and base of the dam.
When load is removed from a rock mass on excavation, it is subject to rebound. The amount
of rebound depends on the modulus of elasticity of the rocks concerned, the larger the
modulus of elasticity, the smaller the rebound. The rebound process in rocks generally takes
considerable time to achieve completion and will continue after a dam has been constructed
if the rebound pressure or heave developed by the foundation material exceeds the effective
weight of the dam. Hence, if heave is to be counteracted, a dam should impose a load on
the foundation equal to or slightly in excess of the load removed.
All foundation and abutment rocks yield elastically to some degree. In particular, the modulus
of elasticity of a rock mass is of primary importance as far as the distribution of stresses
at the base of a concrete dam is concerned. What is more, tensile stresses may develop
in concrete dams when the foundations undergo significant deformation. The modulus of
elasticity is used in the design of gravity dams for comparing the different types of foundation
rocks with each other and with the concrete of the dam. In the design of arch dams, if Young’s
modulus of the foundation has a lower value than that of the concrete or varies widely in the
rocks against which the dam abuts, then dangerous stress conditions may develop in the
dam. The elastic properties of a rock mass and existing strain conditions assume importance
in proportion to the height of a dam since this influences the magnitude of the stresses
imparted to the foundation and abutments. The influence of geological structures in lowering
Young’s modulus must be accounted for by the provision of adequate safety factors. It should
also be borne in mind that blasting during excavation of foundations can open up fissures and
joints that leads to greater deformability of the rock mass. The deformability of the rock mass,
any possible settlements and the amount of increase of deformation with time can be taken
into consideration by assuming lower moduli of elasticity in the foundation or by making
provisions for prestressing.
Geology and Dam Sites
Of the various natural factors that directly influence the design of dams, none is more important
than the geological, not only do they control the character of the foundation but they also
513
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
govern the materials available for construction. The major questions that need answering
include the depth at which adequate foundations exist, the strengths of the rock masses
involved, the likelihood of water loss and any special features that have a bearing on
excavation. The character of the foundations upon which dams are built and their reaction
to the new conditions of stress and strain, of hydrostatic pressure and of exposure to
weathering must be ascertained so that the proper factors of safety may be adopted
to ensure against subsequent failure. Excluding the weaker types of compaction shales,
mudstones, marls, pyrolasts and certain very friable types of sandstone, there are few foun-
dation materials deserving the name rock that are incapable of resisting the bearing loads
even of high dams.
In their unaltered state, plutonic igneous rocks essentially are sound and durable, with
adequate strength for any engineering requirement. In some instances, however, intrusives
may be highly altered by weathering or hydrothermal attack. Generally, the weathered product
of plutonic rocks has a large clay content, although that of granitic rocks is sometimes porous
with a permeability comparable to that of medium-grained sand, so that it requires some type
of cut-off or special treatment of the upstream surface.
Thick massive basalts make satisfactory dam sites but many basalts of comparatively
young geological age are highly permeable, transmitting water via their open joints, pipes,
cavities, tunnels, and contact zones. Foundation problems in young volcanic sequences
are twofold. Firstly, weak beds of ash and tuff may occur between the basalt flows that
give rise to problems of differential settlement or sliding. Secondly, weathering during
periods of volcanic inactivity may have produced fossil soils, these being of much lower
strength.
Rhyolites, and frequently andesites, do not present the same severe leakage problems
as young basalt sequences. They frequently offer good foundations for concrete dams,
although at some sites chemical weathering may mean that embankment designs have to
be adopted.
Pyroclastics usually give rise to extremely variable foundation conditions due to wide varia-
tions in strength, durability and permeability. Their behaviour very much depends on their
degree of induration, for example, many agglomerates have high enough strengths to sup-
port concrete dams and also have low permeabilities. By contrast, ashes are weak and often
highly permeable. One particular hazard concerns ash not previously wetted, that is, it may
be metastable and so undergoes a significant reduction in its void ratio on saturation.
Clay/cement grouting at high pressures may turn ash into a satisfactory foundation. Ashes
frequently are prone to sliding. Montmorillonite is not an uncommon constituent in these rocks
when they are weathered, so that they may swell on wetting.
514
Chapter 9
Fresh metamorphosed rocks such as quartzite and hornfels are very strong and afford excel-
lent dam sites. Marble has the same advantages and disadvantages as other carbonate
rocks. Generally, gneiss has proved a good foundation rock for dams.
Cleavage, schistosity and, to a lesser extent, foliation in regional metamorphic rocks may
adversely affect their strength and make them more susceptible to decay. Moreover areas
of regional metamorphism usually have suffered extensive folding so that rocks may be
fractured and deformed. Some schists, slates and phyllites are variable in quality, some being
excellent for dam site purposes, others, regardless of the degree of their deformation
or weathering, are so poor as to be wholly undesirable in foundations and abutments.
For instance, talc, chlorite and sericite schists are weak rocks containing closely spaced
planes of schistosity.
Some schists become slippery upon weathering and, therefore, fail under moderately light
loads. On the other hand, slates and phyllites tend to be durable. Although slates and
phyllites are suitable for concrete dams where good load-bearing strata occur at a relatively
shallow depth, problems may arise in excavating broad foundations. Particular care is required
in blasting slates, phyllites and schists, otherwise considerable overbreak or shattering
may result. It may be advantageous to use smooth blasting for final trimming purposes.
When compacted in lifts using a vibratory roller, these rocks tend to break down to give
a well-graded permeable fill. Consequently, rock fill embankments are being increasingly
adopted at such sites.
Joints and shear zones are responsible for the unsound rock encountered at dam sites on
plutonic and metamorphic rocks. Unless they are sealed, they may permit leakage through
foundations and abutments. Slight opening of joints on excavation leads to imperceptible
rotations and sliding of rock blocks, large enough to appreciably reduce the strength and
stiffness of the rock mass. Sheet or flat-lying joints tend to be approximately parallel to the
topographic surface and introduce a dangerous element of weakness into valley slopes.
Their width varies and, if they remain untreated, large quantities of water may escape through
them from the reservoir. Indeed, Terzaghi (1962) observed that the most objectionable fea-
ture in terms of the foundation at Mammoth Pool Dam, California, which is in granodiorite,
was the sheet joints orientated parallel to the rock surface. Moreover, joints may transmit
hydrostatic pressures into the rock masses downstream from the abutments that are high
enough to dislodge sheets of rock. If a joint is very wide and located close to the rock
surface, it may close up under the weight or lateral pressure exerted by the dam and cause
differential settlement.
Sandstones have a wide range of strength, depending largely on the amount and type of cement-
matrix material occupying the voids. With the exception of shaley sandstone, sandstone is not
515
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
subject to rapid surface deterioration on exposure. As a foundation rock, even poorly
cemented sandstone is not susceptible to plastic deformation. However, friable sandstones
introduce problems of scour at the foundation. Moreover, sandstones are highly vulnerable
to the scouring and plucking action of the overflow from dams and have to be adequately
protected by suitable hydraulic structures. A major problem of dam sites located in sand-
stones results from the fact that they normally are transected by joints, which reduce resist-
ance to sliding. Generally, however, sandstones have high coefficients of internal friction that
give them high shearing strengths, when restrained under load.
Sandstones frequently are interbedded with shale. These layers of shale may constitute
potential sliding surfaces. Sometimes, such interbedding accentuates the undesirable
properties of the shale by permitting access of water to the shale–sandstone contacts.
Contact seepage may weaken shale surfaces and cause sliding in formations that dip away
from abutments and spillway cuts. Severe uplift pressures also may develop beneath beds
of shale in a dam foundation and appreciably reduce its resistance to sliding. Foundations
and abutments composed of interbedded sandstones and shales also present problems
of settlement and rebound, the magnitude of these factors depending on the character of
the shales.
The permeability of sandstone depends on the amount of cement in the voids and, more
particularly, on the incidence of discontinuities. The porosity of sandstones generally does
not introduce leakage problems of moment, though there are exceptions. The sandstones in
a valley floor may contain many open joints that wedge out with depth, and these often are
caused by rebound of interbedded shales. Conditions of this kind in the abutments and
foundations of dams greatly increase the construction costs for several reasons. They have
a marked influence on the depth of stripping, especially in the abutments. They must be cut
off by pressure grouting and drainage, for the combined purposes of preventing excessive
leakage and reducing the undesirable uplift effects of the hydrostatic pressure of reservoir
water on the base of the dam or on the base of some bedding contact within the dam
foundation.
Limestone dam sites vary widely in their suitability. Thick-bedded, horizontally lying limestones,
relatively free from solution cavities, afford excellent dam sites. Also, limestone requires no
special treatment to ensure a good bond with concrete. On the other hand, thin-bedded,highly
folded or cavernous limestones are likely to present serious foundation or abutment problems
involving bearing capacity or watertightness or both (Soderburg, 1979). Resistance to sliding
involves the shearing strength of limestone. If the rock mass is thin bedded, a possibility of
sliding may exist. This should be guarded against by suitably keying the dam structure into
the foundation rock. Beds separated by layers of clay or shale, especially those inclined
downstream, may serve as sliding planes under certain conditions.
516
Chapter 9
Some solution features are always be present in limestone. The size, form, abundance
and downward extent of these features depend on geological structure and presence
of interbedded impervious layers. Individual cavities may be open, they may be partially
or completely filled with clay, silt, sand or gravel mixtures or they may be water-filled
conduits. Solution cavities present numerous problems in the construction of large dams,
among which bearing capacity and watertightness are paramount. Few dam sites are
so bad that it is impossible to construct safe and successful structures upon them but the
cost of the necessary remedial treatment may be prohibitive. In fact, dam sites should be
abandoned where the cavities are large and numerous, extending to considerable depths.
Sufficient bearing strength generally may be obtained in cavernous rock by deeper exca-
vation than otherwise would be necessary. Watertightness may be attained by removing
the material from cavities, and refilling with concrete. Small filled cavities may be sealed
effectively by washing out and then grouting with cement. The establishment of a water-
tight cut-off through cavernous limestone presents difficulties in proportion to the size and
extent of the solution openings. Grouting has not always proved successful in preventing
water loss from reservoirs on karstic terrains. For example, Bozovic et al. (1981) referred
to large caverns in limestone at the Keban Dam site in Turkey thatexceeded 100,000 m3
in volume. In fact, despite 36,000 m of exploratory drilling and 11 km of exploratory adits,
a huge cavern over 600,000 m3 went undiscovered. This illustrates the fact that risk in
karstic areas cannot be completely eliminated even by intensive site investigation.
Even though these caverns were filled with large blocks of rock (0.5 ¥ 0.5 ¥ 0.5 m) and
aggregate, and an extensive grouting programme carried out, leakage on reservoir
impoundment amounted to some 26 m3s- 1. A classic case of leakage was associated with
the Hales Bar Dam, Tennessee, which was founded on the Bangor Limestone. After com-
pletion of the dam in 1917, it underwent several episodes of extensive grout treatment.
None were successful, and leakage had increased to more than 54 m3 s- 1 by the
late 1950s. Consequently, the dam was demolished in 1968. Another difficult project has
been described by Turkmen et al. (2002), namely, the Kalecik Dam in Turkey. There seep-
age through the karstic limestone beneath led to a 200 m long and 60 m deep grout
curtain being constructed beneath the axis of this rockfill dam. Unfortunately, this did not
solve the seepage problem. A further investigation showed that seepage paths existed
between the dam and the spillway. Therefore, it was recommended that a new grout
curtain be constructed beneath the spillway.
The removal of evaporites by solution can result in subsidence and collapse of overlying
strata. Indeed, cavities have been known to form in the United States within a matter of a few
years where thick beds of gypsum occurred beneath dams. Brune (1965) reported extensive
surface cracking and subsidence in reservoir areas in Oklahoma and New Mexico due to the
collapse of cavernous gypsum. He also noted that a sinkhole appeared in the sediment pool
shortly after the completion of the Cavalry Creek Dam, Oklahoma, which caused much water
517
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
to be lost. Investigations, however, have shown that when anhydrite and gypsum are interbedded
with marl (mudstone), they generally are sound.
Well cemented shales, under structurally sound conditions, present few problems at dam
sites, though their strength limitations and elastic properties may be factors of importance
in the design of concrete dams of appreciable height. They, however, have lower moduli of
elasticity and lower shear strength values than concrete and, therefore, are unsatisfactory foun-
dation materials for arch dams. Moreover, if the lamination is horizontal and well developed,
then the foundations may offer little shear resistance to the horizontal forces exerted by a dam.
A structure keying the dam into such a foundation is then required.
Severe settlements may take place in low grade compaction shales. As a consequence, such
sites are generally developed with earth dams, but associated concrete structures such
as spillways will involve these problems. Rebound in deep spillway cuts may cause buckling
of spillway linings, and differential rebound movements in the foundations may require special
design provisions.
The stability of slopes in cuts is one of the major problems in shale both during and after
construction. Cuttings in shale above structures must be made stable. This problem becomes
particularly acute in dipping formations and in formations containing montmorillonite.
Earth dams are usually constructed on clay soils as they have insufficient load-bearing
properties required to support concrete dams. Beneath valley floors, clays may be contorted,
fractured and softened due to valley bulging so that the load of an earth dam may have to
spread over wider areas than is the case with shales and mudstones. Settlement beneath an
embankment dam constructed on soft clay soils can present problems and may lead to the
development of excess pore water pressures in the foundation soils (Olson, 1998). Rigid
ancillary structures necessitate spread footings or raft foundations. Deep cuts involve problems
of rebound if the weight of removed material exceeds that of the structure. Slope stability
problems also arise, with rotational slides being a hazard.
Among the many manifestations of glaciation are the presence of buried channels; disrupted
drainage systems; deeply filled valleys; sand–gravel terraces; narrow overflow channels
connecting open valleys; and extensive deposits of lacustrine silts and clays, till, and outwash
sands and gravels. Deposits of peat and head (solifluction debris) may be interbedded with
these glacial deposits. Consequently, some glacial deposits may be notoriously variable in
composition, both laterally and vertically. As a result, some dam sites in glaciated areas
are among the most difficult to appraise on the basis of surface evidence. Knowledge of the
preglacial, glacial and postglacial history of a locality is of importance in the search for the
most practical sites. A primary consideration in glacial terrains is the discovery of sites where
518
Chapter 9
rock foundations are available for spillway, outlet and powerhouse structures. Generally, earth
dams are constructed in areas of glacial deposits. Concrete dams, however, are feasible in post-
glacial, rock-cut valleys, and composite dams are practical in valleys containing rock benches.
The major problems associated with foundations on alluvial deposits generally result from the
fact that the deposits are poorly consolidated. Silts and clays are subject to plastic deformation
or shear failure under relatively light loads and undergo consolidation for long periods of time
when subjected to appreciable loads. Embankment dams are normally constructed on such
soils as they lack the load-bearing capacity necessary to support concrete dams. The slopes
of an embankment dam may be flattened in order to mobilize greater foundation shear
strength, or berms may be introduced into the slope. Nonetheless, many large embankment
dams have been built on such materials, but this demands a thorough exploration and testing
programme in order to design safe structures. Soft alluvial clays at ground level generally
have been removed if economically feasible. Where soft alluvial clays are not more than 2.3 m
thick, they may consolidate during construction if covered with a drainage blanket, especially
if they are resting on sand and gravel. It may be necessary in thicker deposits to incorporate
vertical drains within the clays (Almeida et al., 2000). On the other hand, coarser sands and
gravels undergo comparatively little consolidation under load and therefore often afford
good foundations for earth dams. Their primary problems result from their permeability.
Alluvial sands and gravels form natural drainage blankets under an earth or rock fill dam, so that
seepage through them beneath the dam must be cut off. Problems relating to underseepage
through pervious strata may be tackled by a cut-off trench, if the depth to bedrock is not too
great or by a grout curtain. Otherwise, underseepage may be checked by the construction of
an impervious upstream blanket to lengthen the path of percolation and the installation on the
downstream side of suitable drainage facilities to collect the seepage.
Talus or scree may clothe the lower slopes in mountainous areas and, because of its high
permeability, must be avoided in the location of a dam site, unless it is sufficiently shallow to
be economically removed from under the footprint of the dam.
Landslips are a common feature of valleys in mountainous areas, and large slips often cause
narrowing of a valley that therefore looks topographically suitable for a dam. Unless they are
shallow seated and can be removed or effectively drained, it is prudent to avoid landslipped
areas in dam location, because their unstable nature may result in movement during
construction or, subsequently, on filling or drawdown of the reservoir.
Fault zones may be occupied by shattered or crushed material and so represent zones
of weakness that may give rise to landslip upon excavation for a dam. The occurrence of
faults in a river is not unusual, and this generally means that the material along the fault zone
is highly altered. A deep cut-off is necessary in such a situation.
519
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
In most known instances of historic fault breaks, the fracturing has occurred along a pre-existing
fault. Fault movement not only occurs in association with large and infrequent earthquakes
but it also occurs in association with small shocks and continuous slippage known as fault
creep. Earthquakes resulting from displacement and energy release on one fault can some-
times trigger small displacements on other unrelated faults many kilometres distant. Breaks on
subsidiary faults have occurred at distances as great as 25 km from the main fault, obviously
with increasing distance from the main fault, the amount of displacement decreases.
Individual breaks along faults during earthquakes have ranged in length from less than a
kilometre to several hundred kilometres. However, the length of the fault break during a
particular earthquake is generally only a fraction of the true length of the fault. The longer fault
breaks have greater displacements and generate larger earthquakes. The maximum
displacement is less than 6 m for the great majority of fault breaks, and the average displace-
ment along the length of the fault is less than half the maximum. These figures suggest that
zoned embankment dams can be safely built at sites with active faults.
All major faults located in regions where strong earthquakes have occurred should be
regarded as potentially active unless convincing evidence exists to the contrary (Sherard
et al., 1974). In stable areas of the world, little evidence exists of notable fault displacements
in the recent past. Nevertheless, an investigation should be carried out to confirm the
absence of active faults at or near any proposed major dam in any part of the world.
Construction Materials for Earth Dams
Wherever possible, construction materials for an earth dam should be obtained from within
the future reservoir basin. Accordingly, the investigation for the dam site and the surrounding
area should determine the availability of impervious and pervious materials for the embankment,
sand and gravel for drains and filter blankets, and stone for riprap.
In some cases, only one type of soil is readily obtainable for an earth dam. If this is impervious,
then the design will consist of a homogeneous embankment, which incorporates a small
amount of permeable material in order to control internal seepage. On the other hand, where
sand and gravel are in plentiful supply, a very thin earth core may be built into the dam if
enough impervious soil is available, otherwise an impervious membrane may be constructed
of concrete or interlocking steel sheet piles. However, since concrete can withstand very little
settlement, such core walls should be located on sound foundations.
Sites that provide a variety of soils lend themselves to the construction of zoned dams. The
finer, more impervious materials are used to construct the core, whereas the coarser materials
provide strength in the upstream and downstream zones.
520
Chapter 9
Embankment soils need to develop high shear strength, low permeability and low water
absorption, and undergo minimal settlement. This is achieved by compaction. The degree
of compaction achieved is reflected by the dry density of the soil. The relationship between
dry density and moisture content of a soil for a particular compactive effort is assessed by
a compaction test.
Serious piping damage and failures have occurred when dispersive soils have been used for
the construction of earth dams. Early indications of piping take the form of small leakages of
muddy water from an earth embankment after initial filling of the reservoir. Dispersive erosion
may be caused by initial seepage through the more pervious areas in an earth dam. This is
especially the case in areas in which compaction may not be so effective, such as at the
contacts with conduits, against concrete structures and the foundation interface; through
desiccation cracks; or through cracks formed by differential settlement or hydraulic fracturing.
In fact, most earth dams that have failed in South Africa did so on first wetting because that
is when the fill is most vulnerable to hydraulic fracturing (Bell and Maud, 1994). Fractures
represent paths along which piping can develop. The pipes can enlarge rapidly, and this can
lead to failure of a dam. Far more failures have occurred in small homogeneous earth dams,
which generally are more poorly engineered and seldom have filters, than in major dams
(see Fig. 5.9).
River Diversion
Wherever dams are built, there are problems concerned with keeping the associated river
under control. These have a greater influence on the design of an embankment dam than
a concrete dam. In narrow, steep-sided valleys, the river is diverted through a tunnel or
conduit before the foundation is completed over the floor of the river. However, the abutment
sections of an embankment dam can be constructed in wider valleys prior to river diversion.
In such instances, suitable borrow materials must be set aside for the closure section, as this
often has to be constructed rapidly so that overtopping is avoided. But rapid placement of the
closure section can give rise to differential settlement and associated cracking. Hence, extra
filter drains may be required to control leakage through such cracks. Compaction of the closure
section at a higher average water content means that it can adjust more easily to differential
settlement without cracking.
Ground Improvement
Grouting has proved effective in reducing percolation of water through dam foundations, and
its introduction into dam construction has allowed considerable cost saving by avoiding the
521
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
use of deep cut-off and wing trenches. Consequently, many sites that previously were considered
unsuitable because of adverse geological conditions can now be used.
Initial estimates of the groutability of ground frequently been have based on the results
of pumping-in tests, in which water is pumped into the ground via a drillhole. Lugeon (1933)
suggested that grouting beneath concrete gravity dams was necessary when the permeability
exceeded 1 lugeon unit (i.e. a flow of 1 l m- 1 min- 1 at a pressure of 1 MPa). However, this
standard has been relaxed in modern practice, particularly for earth dams and for foundations
in which seepage is acceptable in terms of lost storage and non-erodibility of foundation
or core materials (Houlsby, 1990).
The effect of a grout curtain is to form a wall of low permeability within the ground below
a dam. Holes are drilled and grouted, from the base of the cut-off or heel trench downwards.
Where joints are vertical, it is advisable to drill groutholes at a rake of 10–15∞, since these cut
across the joints at different levels, whereas vertical holes may miss them.
The rate at which grout can be injected into the ground generally increases with an increase
in the grouting pressure, but this is limited since excessive pressures cause the ground
to fracture and lift (Kennedy, 2001). The safe maximum pressure depends on the weight
of overburden, the strength of the ground, the in situ stresses and the pore water pressures.
However, there is no simple relationship between these factors and safe maximum grouting
pressure. Hydraulic fracture tests may be used, especially in fissile rocks, to determine the
most suitable pressures or the pressures may be related to the weight of overburden.
Once the standard of permeability has been decided, for the whole or a section of a grout
curtain, it is achieved by split spacing or closure methods in which primary, secondary, tertiary,
etc., sequences of grouting are carried out until water tests in the groutholes approach
the required standard (Houlsby, 1990). In multiple-row curtains, the outer rows should be
completed first, thereby allowing the inner rows to effect closure on the outer rows. A spacing
of 1.5 m between rows usually is satisfactory. The upstream row should be the tightest row,
with the tightness decreasing downstream. Single-row curtains generally are constructed by
drilling alternate holes first and then completing the treatment by intermediate holes. Ideally,
a grout curtain is taken to a depth where the requisite degree of tightness is available naturally.
This is determined either by investigation holes sunk prior to the design of the grout curtain,
or by primary holes sunk during grouting (Ewert, 2005). The search usually does not go
beyond a depth equal to the height of the storage head above ground surface.
Consolidation grouting is usually shallow, the holes seldom extending more than 10 m.
It is intended to improve jointed rock by increasing its strength and reducing its
permeability. Consolidation grouting in the foundation area increases the bearing capacity
522
Chapter 9
and minimizes settlement. The extent of consolidation grouting upstream and downstream
of the grout curtain depends on the conditions in the upper zone of the foundation (Kutzner,
1996). Consolidation grouting also improves the contact between concrete and rock, and
makes good any slight loosening of the rock surface due to blasting operations. In addition,
it affords a degree of homogeneity to the foundation that is desirable if differential settlement
and unbalanced stresses are to be avoided. In other words, the grout increases rock stiffness
and attempts to bring Young’s modulus to the required high uniform values. Holes usually are
drilled normal to the foundation surface but they may be orientated to intersect specific features
in certain instances. They are set out on a grid pattern at 3 to 14m centres, dependingon the
nature of the rock. Consolidation grouting must be completed before the construction of
a dam begins.
Casagrande (1961) cast doubts on the need for grout curtains, maintaining that a single-row
grout curtain constructed prior to reservoir filling frequently is inadequate. What is more, he
stated that grouting was useless as far as reducing water pressures was concerned and that
drainage systems were the only efficient method of controlling the piezometric level and
therefore uplift forces along a dam foundation. He further maintained that drainage is the only
efficient treatment available for rock of low hydraulic conductivity that contains fine
fissures. Drainage can control the hydraulic potential on the downstream side of a dam, thus
achieving what is required of a grout curtain except, of course, that drainage does not reduce
the amount of leakage. However, leakage is not of consequence in rock masses where the
hydraulic conductivity is low. In other words, Casagrande contended that for fissured rocks
of low permeability (i.e. less than 5 lugeon units), drainage generally is essential, whereas
grouting constitutes a wasted effort. Conversely, if the permeability is high (in excess of
50 lugeon units), grouting is necessary to control groundwater leakage beneath a dam.
Highways
The location of highways and other routeways is influenced in the first instance by topography.
Embankments, cuttings, tunnels and bridges (viaducts) can be constructed to carry roads
and railroads with acceptable gradients through areas of more difficult terrain. Obviously, the
construction of such structures increases the difficulty, time and cost of building routeways.
Nonetheless, the distance between the centres that routeways connect has to be considered.
Although geological conditions often do not determine the exact location of routeways, they
can have a highly significant influence on their construction.
As highways are linear structures, they often traverse a wide variety of ground conditions along
their length. In addition, the construction of a highway requires the excavation of soils and rocks,
and stable foundations for the highway, as well as construction materials. The ground
523
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
beneath roads and, more particularly, embankments, must have sufficient bearing capacity
to prevent foundation failure and also be capable of preventing excess settlements due to
the imposed load (Kezdi and Rethati, 1988). Very weak and compressible ground may need
to be entirely removed before construction takes place, although this will depend on the
quantity of material involved. For instance, if peat is less than 3–4 m thick and is underlain
by a soil with a satisfactory bearing capacity, such as gravel or dense sand, then the peat
may be removed prior to the construction of a road or, more particularly, an embankment
(Perry et al., 2000). In some cases, heave that occurs due to the removal of load may cause
problems. In other cases, improvement of the ground by the use of lime or cement stabilization,
compaction, surcharging, the use of drainage, the installation of piles, stone columns or
mattresses may need to be carried out prior to road and embankment construction (Cooper
and Rose, 1999). Usually, the steepest side slopes possible are used when constructing cuttings
and embankments, as this minimizes the amount of land required for the highway and the
quantity of material that has to be moved. Obviously, attention must be given to the stability
of slopes (Green and Hawkins, 2005). Slight variations in strength, spacing of discontinuities
or the grade of weathering of rock masses can have an effect on the rate of excavation.
Where the materials excavated are unsuitable for construction, considerable extra expense
is entailed in disposing of waste and importing fill. Geological features such as faults, crush
zones and solution cavities, as well as man-made features such as abandoned mine workings
can cause difficulties during construction.
Normally, a road consists of a number of layers, each of which has a particular function.
In addition, the type of pavement structure depends on the nature and number of the vehicles
it has to carry, their wheel loads and the period of time over which it has to last (Brown, 1996).
The wearing surface of a modern road consists either of “black-top” (i.e. bituminous bound
aggregate) or a concrete slab, although a bituminous surfacing may overlie a concrete base.
A concrete slab distributes the load that the road has to carry, whereas in a bituminous road, the
load primarily is distributed by the base beneath. The base and sub-base below the wearing
surface generally consist of granular material, although in heavy-duty roads, the base may
be treated with cement. The subgrade refers to the soil immediately beneath the sub-base.
However much the load is distributed by the layers above, the subgrade has to carry the load
of the road structure plus that of the traffic. Consequently, the top of the subgrade may have
to be strengthened by compaction or stabilization. The strength of the subgrade, however,
does not remain the same throughout its life. Changes in its strength are brought about by
changes in its moisture content, by repeated wheel loading, and in some parts of the world
by frost action. Although the soil in the subgrade exists above the water table and beneath
a sealed surface, this does not stop the ingress of water. As a consequence, partially saturated
or saturated conditions can exist in the soil. Also, road pavements are constructed at a level
where the subgrade is affected by wetting and drying, which may lead to swelling and
shrinkage, respectively, if the subgrade consists of expansive clay. Such volume changes are
524
Chapter 9
non-uniform, and the associated movements may damage the pavement (Xeidakis et al., 2004).
Irrecoverable plastic and viscous strains can accumulate under repeated wheel loading. In a
bituminous pavement, repeated wheel loading can lead to fatigue and cracking, and rutting
occurs as a result of the accumulation of vertical permanent strains.
Topographic and geological maps, remote sensing imagery and aerial photographs are used
in highway location. These allow the preliminary plans and profiles of highways to be prepared.
Geomorphological mapping has proved especially useful is relation to road construction in
mountainous areas (Hearn, 2002). Geomorphological mapping helps to identify the general
characteristics of an area in which a route is to be located. Moreover, it provides information
on land-forming processes and geohazards that can affect road construction, on the character
of natural slopes and on the location of construction materials, in addition to providing a basis
on which to plan the subsequent site exploration. Such mapping can help the preliminary
design of cut and fill slopes and land drainage, and help determine the approximate land-take
requirements of a road. The site investigation provides the engineer with information on the
ground and groundwater conditions on which a rational and economic design for a highway
can be made. This information should indicate the suitability of the proposed location; the
quantity of earthworks involved; the subsoil and surface drainage requirements; and the avail-
ability of suitable construction materials. Other factors that have to be taken account include the
safe gradients for cuttings and embankments, locations of river crossings and possibleground
treatment.
Unfortunately, many soils can prove problematic in highway engineering, because they expand
and shrink, collapse, disperse, undergo excessive settlement, have a distinct lack of strength
or are corrosive. Such characteristics may be attributable to their composition, the nature
of their pore fluids, their mineralogy or their fabric. Frost heave can cause serious damage
to roads, leading to their break-up. Furthermore, the soil may become saturated when the ice
melts, giving rise to thaw settlement and loss of bearing capacity. Repeated cycles of freez-
ing and thawing change the structure of the soil, again reducing its bearing capacity. Rigid
concrete pavements are more able to resist frost action than flexible bituminouspavements.
Geohazards obviously have an adverse influence on roads. Movement of sand in arid areas
can bury obstacles in its path such as routeways. Such moving sand necessitates continuous
and often costly maintenance activities. In addition, the high rates of evaporation in hot
arid areas may lead to ground heave due to the precipitation of minerals within the capillary
fringe of the soil. In the absence of downward leaching, surface deposits become contaminated
with precipitated salts, particularly sulphates and chlorides. Landslides on either natural
or man-made slopes adversely affect roadways (Al-Homoud and Tubeileh, 1997). Maerz et al.
(2005) discussed rockfall hazard rating systems in relation to the protection of highways
in Missouri. Slope stabilization measures have been dealt with earlier. Not only can flooding
525
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.23
Erosion and removal of part of the approach road to the Mvoti Bridge, Natal, South Africa.
disrupt road traffic, but it can cause the destruction of roads (Bell, 1994a; Fig. 9.23).
Earthquake damage to routeways can cause disruption to urban centres that rely on these
routeways (Fig. 9.24). Damage to a particular zone of a routeway can affect an area extending
beyond the zone. Geological conditions, especially soil properties, potential relative
ground displacement and potential horizontal and vertical strain distribution therefore must be
taken into account when designing routeways in seismically active regions. Notable ground
movements can result from mining subsidence, the type of movements and the time of their
occurrence being influenced by the method of mining used. It probably will be necessary to
fill mined voids beneath roads with bulk grout. Faults and dykes in mining areas can concen-
trate the effects of mining subsidence, giving rise to surface cracking or the development of
steps, which can lead to severe surface disruption of highways (Stacey and Bell, 1999). Such
movement entails local resurfacing of highways. Natural voids and cavities in rock masses
also can represent potential subsidence problems in routeway construction (Fig. 9.25). The
collapse of a sinkhole beneath a road can be responsible for disastrous consequences, for
example, Boyer (1997) referred to vehicles falling into newly opened sinkholes in Maryland
and the death or serious injury of the occupants. Once sinkholes have been located, they are
filled with bulk grout (Petersen et al., 2003). Geogrids are now used in road construction in
areas where subsidence, due either to natural causes or mining, could pose a future threat.
526
Figure 9.24
Luanhe Bridge on the Beijing–Yuguan Highway, collapse of the deck and piers due to the Tangshan earthquake, 1976.
Figure 9.25
Collapse of a road over a sinkhole, Centurian, South Africa.
527
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
In the case of cavity collapse, they hopefully prevent the road falling into the cavity before
repairs are carried out (Cooper and Saunders, 2002).
Soil Stabilization and Road Construction
The objectives of mixing additives with soil are to improve volume stability, strength and
stress–strain properties, permeability and durability. In clay soils, swelling and shrinkage
can be reduced. Good mixing of stabilizers with soil is the most important factor affecting the
quality of results. Cement and lime are the two most commonly used additives.
The principal use of soil–cement is as a base material underlying the pavement (Bell, 1995).
One of the reasons soil–cement is used as a base is to prevent pumping of fine-grained
subgrade soils into the pavement above. The thickness of the soil–cement base depends
on subgrade strength, pavement design, traffic and loading conditions and thickness of
the wearing surface. Frequently, however, soil-cement bases are around 150–200 mm
in thickness. The principal use of the addition of lime to soil is for subgrade and sub-base
stabilization, and as a construction expedient on wet sites where lime is used to dry out the
soil. Lime stabilization of expansive clay soils, prior to construction, can minimize the amount
of shrinkage and swelling they undergo (Bell, 1996a). However, significant SO content
4
(i.e. in excess of 5000 mg kg- 1) in clay soils can mean that it reacts with CaO to form ettringite
. . . . .
[Ca Al (OH) (SO ) 27H O] or thaumasite [CaSiO CaCO CaSO 14 5H O] with resultant
6 2 12 43 2 3 3 4 2
expansion and heave, as happened during the construction of a motorway in Oxfordshire,
England. The main sources of sulphate likely to cause heave in lime-stabilized clay soils
beneath roads are gypsum and pyrite. Nevertheless, Wild et al. (1999) claimed that such
swelling in lime-stabilized soils can be suppressed by the use of ground-granulated blast-furnace
slag, GGBS. They recommended that 60–80% of the lime should be replaced by GGBS
in order to minimize or eliminate sulphate expansion, and that compaction should be wet
of optimum. Similarly, Kumar and Sharma (2004) indicated that the addition of fly ash to lime
or cement would, on stabilization, reduce swelling and improve the engineering characteristics
of expansive soils. As far as cement and lime stabilization for roadways is concerned,
stabilization is brought about by the addition of between 3 and 6% of cement or lime (by dry
weight of soil). Subgrade stabilization involves stabilizing the soil in place or stabilizing
borrow materials that are used for sub-bases. After the soil, which is to be stabilized, has
been brought to grade, the roadway should be scarified to full depth and width and then partly
pulverized. A rooter, grader, scarifier and/or disc-harrow are used for initial scarification,
followed by a rotary mixer for pulverization. After mixing in the cement or lime and any
additional water needed to reach the optimum moisture content, compaction and grading to
the final level is carried out (Fig. 9.26). Finally, the processed layer is covered with a water-
proof membrane, commonly bitumen emulsion, to prevent drying out and to ensure hydration.
528
Chapter 9
Figure 9.26
Lime stabilization for an access road at Heathrow airport, London, England.
The properties developed by compacted cement or lime-stabilized soils are governed by the
amount of cement or lime added on the one hand and compaction on the other. With increasing
cement or lime content, the strength and bearing capacity increase, as does the durability to
wet–dry cycles. The permeability generally decreases but tends to increase in clayey soils.
The Use of Geotextiles in Road Construction
The improvement in the performance of a pavement attributable to the inclusion of geotextiles
comes mainly from their separation and reinforcing functions. This can be assessed in terms
of either an improved system performance (e.g. reduction in deformation or increase in traffic
passes before failure) or reduced aggregate thickness requirements (where reductions of the
order 25–50% are feasible for low-strength subgrade conditions with suitable geotextiles).
The most frequent role of geotextiles in road construction is as a separator between the
sub-base and subgrade. This prevents the subgrade material from intruding into the sub-base
due to repeated traffic loading and so increases the bearing capacity of the system. The savings
in sub-base materials, which would otherwise be lost due to mixing with the subgrade,
529
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
can sometimes cover the cost of the geotextile. The range of gradings or materials that can
be used as sub-bases with geotextiles normally is greater than when they are not used.
Nevertheless, the sub-base materials preferably should be angular, compactable and sufficiently
well graded to provide a good riding surface.
If a geotextile is to increase the bearing capacity of a subsoil or pavement significantly, then
large deformations of the soil-geotextile system generally must be accepted, as a geotextile
has no bending stiffness, is relatively extensible, usually is laid horizontally and is restrained
from extending laterally. Thus, considerable vertical movement is required to provide the
necessary stretching to induce the tension that affords vertical load-carrying capacity to the
geotextile. Therefore, geotextiles are likely to be of most use when included within low-density
sands and very soft clays. Although large deformations may be acceptable for access and haul
roads, they are not acceptable for most permanent pavements. In this case, the geotextileat
the sub-base, subgrade interface should not be subjected to mechanical stress or abrasion.
When geotextile is used in temporary or permanent road construction, it helps redistribute the
load above any local soft spots that occur in a subgrade. In other words, the geotextile
deforms locally and progressively redistributes load to the surrounding areas, thereby limiting
local deflections. As a result, the extent of local pavement failure and differential settlement
is reduced.
The use of geogrid reinforcement in road construction helps restrain lateral expansive
movements at the base of the aggregate. This gives rise to improved load redistribution in the
sub-base that, in turn, means a reduced pressure on the subgrade. In addition, the cyclic strains
in the pavement are reduced. The stiff load bearing platform created by the interlocking of
granular fill with geogrids is utilized effectively in the construction of roads over weak soil.
Reduction of 30–50% in the required aggregate thickness may be achieved. Geogrids can
be used within a granular capping layer when constructing roads over variable sub-grades.
They also have been used to construct access roads across peat, the geogrid enabling the
roads to be “floated” over the surface.
In arid regions, impermeable geomembranes can be used as capillary breaks to stop the
upward movement of salts where they would destroy the road surface. Geomembranes also
can be used to prevent the formation of ice lenses in permafrost and other frost-prone
regions. The geomembrane must be located below the frost line and above the water table.
Where there is a likelihood of uplift pressure disturbing a road constructed below the piezometric
level, it is important to install a horizontal drainage blanket. This intercepts the rising water
and conveys it laterally to drains at the side of the road. A geocomposite can be used for
effective horizontal drainage. Problems can arise when sub-bases are sensitive to moisture
changes, that is, they swell, shrink or degrade. In such instances, it is best to envelop the
530
Chapter 9
sub-base in a geomembrane; or excavate, replace and compact the upper layers of the
sub-base in an envelope of impermeable geomembrane.
Embankments
The engineering properties of soils used for embankments, such as their shear strength
and compressibility, are influenced by the amount of compaction they have undergone.
Accordingly, the desired amount of compaction is established in relation to the engineering
properties required for the embankment to perform its design function. A specification for
compaction needs to indicate the type of compaction equipment to be used, its mass, speed
and travel, and any other factors influencing performance such as frequency of vibration,
thickness of layers to be compacted and number of passes of the compactor (Table 9.8).
Embankments are mechanically compacted by laying and rolling soil in thin layers. The soil
particles are packed more closely due to a reduction in the volume of the void space, resulting
from the momentary application of loads such as rolling, tamping or vibration. Compaction
involves the expulsion of air from the voids without the moisture content being changed
significantly. Hence, the degree of saturation is increased. However, all the air cannot be
expelled from the soil by compaction so that complete saturation is not achievable.
Nevertheless, compaction does lead to a reduced tendency for changes in the moisture
content of the soil to occur. The method of compaction used depends on the soil type, including
its grading and moisture content at the time of compaction; the total quantity of material,
layer thickness and rate at which it is to be compacted; and the geometry of the proposed
earthworks.
A clayey soil is stiff and therefore more difficult to compact when the moisture content is low.
As the moisture content increases, it enhances the interparticle repulsive forces, thus
separating the particles causing the soil to soften and become more workable. This gives rise
to higher dry densities and lower air contents. As saturation is approached, however, pore
water pressure effects counteract the effectiveness of the compactive effort. Each soil
therefore has an optimum moisture content at which the soil has a maximum dry density.
The compaction characteristics of clay are governed largely by its moisture content.
For instance, a greater compactive effort is necessary as the moisture content is lowered.
It may be necessary to use thinner layers and more passes by a heavier compaction plant than
required for granular materials. The properties of cohesive fills also depend to a much greater
extent on the placement conditions than do those of a coarse-grained fills (Charles and
Skinner, 2001). In addition, the shear strength and compressibility of compacted clayey soil
depend on its density and moisture content, and are influenced by the pore water pressure.
Compaction of cohesive soils should be carried out when the moisture content of the soil is
531
532 E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
G
e
o
l
o
g
y
Table 9.8. Typical compaction characteristics for soils used in earthwork construction (after Anon, 1981b). With kind permission of the
British Standards Institutions
Minimum
number of Maximum
passes for thickness
Major Suitable type of satisfactory of compacted
Soil group Subgroup compaction plant compaction layer (mm) Remarks
Coarse Gravels and Well-graded gravel and Grid roller over 540 kg 3–12, 75–275,
soils gravelly gravel/sand mixtures; per 100 mm of roll depending depending
soils little or no fines Pneumatic-tyred roller over on type of on type
Well-graded gravel/sand 2000 kg per wheel plant of plant
mixtures with excellent Vibratory plate compactor over
clay binder 1100 kgm- 2of baseplate
Uniform gravel; little or Smooth-wheeled roller
no fines Vibro-rammer
Poorly graded gravel and Self-propelled tamping roller
gravel/sand mixtures;
little or no fines
Gravel with excess fines,
silty gravel, clayey gravel,
poorly graded gravel/
sand/clay mixtures
Sands and Well-graded sands and
sandy gravelly sands; little or
soils no fines
Well-graded sands with
excellent clay binder
Uniform Uniform gravels; little or Smooth-wheeled roller below 3–16, 75–300,
sands and no fines 500 kg per 100 mm of roll depending depending
gravels Uniform sands; little or Grid roller below 540 kg per on type on type
no fines 100 mm of plant of plant
533
Chapter
9
Poorly graded sands; Pneumatic-tyred roller below
little or no fines 1500 kg per wheel
Sands with fines; silty sands, Vibrating roller
clayey sands, poorly graded Vibrating plate compactor
sand/clay mixtures Vibro-tamper
Fine Soils having Silts (inorganic) and very Sheepsfoot roller 4–8, 100–450, If moisture
soils low fine sands, silty or clayey Smooth-wheeled roller depending on depending on content is
plasticity fine sands with slight Pneumatic-tyred roller type of plant type of plant low, it may be
plasticity Vibratory roller over 70 kg preferable to
Clayey silts (inorganic) per 100 mm roll use a vibratory
Organic silts of low plasticity Vibratory plate compactor roller
over 1400 kg m- 2of Sheepsfoot rollers
baseplate are best suited
Vibro-tamper to soils at a
Power rammer moisture
content below
their plastic limit
Soils having Silty and sandy clays
medium (inorganic) of medium
plasticity plasticity
Clays (inorganic) of medium
plasticity
Soils having Fine sandy and silty soils, Should only be
high plastic silts used when
plasticity Clays (inorganic) of high circumstances
plasticity, fat clays are favourable
Note:Organic clays generally are unsuitable for earth works and those of high plasticity should not be used.
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
not more than 2% above the plastic limit. If it exceeds this figure, the soil should be allowed
to dry. Over-compaction of soil on site, that is, compacting the soil beyond the optimum moisture
content, means that the soil becomes softer. As far as granular material is concerned, it can
be compacted at its natural moisture content, and normally it is easier to compact. When
compacted, granular soils have a high load-bearing capacity and are not compressible.
Usually, they are not susceptible to frost action unless they contain a high proportion of fines.
Unfortunately, if granular material contains a significant amount of fines, then high pore water
pressures can develop during compaction if the moisture content of the soil is high. Some
soils such as highly plastic and organic clays undergo large volume changes and cannot be
stabilized effectively by compaction.
The most critical period during the construction of an embankment is just before it is brought
to grade or shortly thereafter. At this time, pore water pressure, due to consolidation in the
embankment and foundation, is at a maximum. The magnitude and distribution of pore water
pressure developed during construction depend primarily on the construction water content,
the properties of the soil, the height of the embankment and the rate at which dissipation by
drainage can occur. Water contents above optimum can cause high construction pore water
pressure, which increase the danger of rotational slips in embankments constructed of clayey
soil (Aubeny and Lytton, 2004). Well graded clayey sands and sand–gravel–clay mixtures
develop the highest construction pore water pressures, whereas uniform silts and fine silty
sands are the least susceptible.
Geogrids or geomats can be used in the construction of embankments over poor ground
without the need excavate the ground and substitute granular fill. They can allow acceleration
of fill placement often in conjunction with vertical band drains. Layers of geogrids or geowebs
can be used at the base of an embankment to intersect potential deep failure surfaces or
to help construct an embankment over peat deposits. Geogrids also can be used to encap-
sulate a drainage layer of granular material at the base of an embankment. The use of band
drains or a drainage layer helps reduce and regulate differential settlement. A geocell
mattress can be constructed at the base of an embankment that is to be constructed over soft
soil. The cells are generally about 1 m high and are filled with granular material. This also
acts as a drainage layer. The mattress intersects potential failure planes, and its rigidity
forces them deeper into firmer soil. The rough interface at the base of the mattress ensures
mobilization of the maximum shear capacity of the foundation soil and significantly increases
stability. Differential settlement and lateral spread are minimized.
If the soil beneath a proposed embankment, which is to carry a road, is likely to undergo appre-
ciable settlement, then the soil can be treated. One of the commonest forms of treatment is
precompression. Those soils that are best suited to improvement by precompression include
534
Chapter 9
compressible silts, saturated soft clays, organic clays and peats. The presence of thin layers
of sand or silt in compressible material may mean that rapid consolidation takes place.
Unfortunately, this may be accompanied by the development of abnormally high pore water
pressures in those layers beyond the edge of the precompression load. This ultimately lowers
their shearing resistance to less than that of the surrounding weak soil. Such excess pore
water pressures may have to be relieved by vertical drains.
Precompression normally is brought about by preloading, which involves the placement and
removal of a dead load. This compresses the foundation soils, thereby inducing settlement
prior to construction. If the load intensity from the dead weight exceeds the pressure imposed
by the final load of the embankment, this is referred to as surcharging. In other words,
the surcharge is the excess load additional to the final load and is used to accelerate the
compression process. The surcharge load is removed after a certain amount of settlement
has taken place. Soil undergoes considerably more compression during the first phase
of loading than during any subsequent reloading. Moreover, the amount of expansion following
unloading is not significant (Alonso et al., 2000). The installation of vertical drains (e.g. sandwicks
or band drains) beneath the precompression load helps shorten the time required to bring
about primary consolidation. The water from the drains flows into a drainage blanket placed
at the surface or to highly permeable layers deeper in the soil. Another method of bringing
about precompression is by vacuum preloading by pumping from beneath an impervious
membrane placed over the ground surface (Tang and Shang, 2000).
Reinforced Earth
Reinforced earth is a composite material consisting of soil that is reinforced with metallic
or geogrid strips. The effectiveness of the reinforcement is governed by its tensile strength
and the bond it develops with the surrounding soil. It also is necessary to provide some form
of barrier to contain the soil at the edge of a reinforced earth structure (Fig. 9.8). This facing
can be either flexible or stiff, but it must be strong enough to retain the soil and to allow the
reinforcement to be fixed to it. As reinforced earth is flexible and the structural components
are built at the same time as backfill is placed, it is particularly suited for use over compressible
foundations where differential settlements may occur during or soon after construction.
In addition, as a reinforced earth wall uses small prefabricated components and requires no
formwork, it can be adapted to the required variations in height or shape. Granular fill is the
most suitable in that it is free draining and non-frost susceptible, as well as being virtually
non-corrosive as far as the reinforcing elements are concerned. It also is relatively stable,
eliminating post-construction movements. Nonetheless, fine-grained materials can be used
as fill but a slower construction schedule is necessary.
535
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Railroads
Railroads have played and continue to play an important role in national transportation
systems, although the construction of new railroads on a large scale is something that belongs to
the past. Nonetheless, railroads continue to be built such as those associated with high-speed
networks. A vital part of a high-speed railroad, with trains travelling at speeds of up to
300 km h- 1, is the trackbed support. In other words, the dynamic behaviour of foundations and
earthworks involves a detailed understanding of the soil–structure interaction. This distinguishes
a modern high-speed railway from other railways or highways. Obviously, the grades and curva-
ture of railroads impose stricter limits than do those associated with highways. Furthermore,
underground systems are being and will continue to be constructed beneath many large cities in
order to convey large numbers of people from one place to another quickly and efficiently.
Topography and geology are as important in railroad construction as in highway construction
(O’Riordan, 2003). A good illustration of this has been provided by Baynes et al. (2005), who out-
lined an engineering geological and geomorphological approach to the construction of railways in
the Pilbara, Western Australia. As noted, a very stable trackbed and earthworks are necessary for
a high-speed railroad. Accordingly, drainage is an important aspect of trackbed design, so that
surface water is removed efficiently and groundwater level is maintained below the subgrade.
Another important factor is trackbed stiffness. Consequently, where sudden changes of stiffness
are likely to occur, notably between embankments and bridges, this can involve the use of layers
of cement-stabilized and well-graded granular material to provide a gradual transition in stiffness.
Deep dry soil mixing can be used where embankments are constructed over soft clays and peats.
Railroads obviously can be affected by geohazards. In rugged terrain, in particular, trains
may be interrupted for a time by rock falls, landslides or mudflows (Fig. 9.27). Areas prone
to such hazards along a railroad need to be identified and, where possible, stabilization
or protective measures carried out (see Chapter 3). In some areas, because of the nature of
the terrain, it may be impossible to stabilize entire slopes. In such cases, warning devices can
be installed that are triggered by such movements and cause trains to halt. Be that as it may,
lengths of track that are subjected to mass movements should be inspected regularly.
Remedial works in landslipped areas can include some combination of subsurface drainage,
redesign and/or reinforcement of slopes. Railway services also may be interrupted seriously
by flooding, earthquakes or the development of sinkholes (Erwin and Brown, 1988).
Railway track formations normally consist of a layer of coarse aggregate, the ballast, in which
the sleepers are embedded. The ballast may rest directly on the subgrade or, depending
on the bearing capacity, on a layer of blanketing sand. The function of the ballast is to provide
a free-draining base that is stable enough to maintain the track alignment with the minimum
of maintenance. The blanketing sand provides a filter that prevents the migration of fines from
536
Chapter 9
Figure 9.27
Amudflow partially engulfing a train on the Chengdu–Kunming railway, China.
the subgrade into the ballast due to pumping. The ballast must be thick enough to retain the
track in position and to prevent intermittent loading from deforming the subgrade, and the
aggregate beneath the sleepers must be able to resist abrasion and attrition. Hence, strong,
good–wearing angular aggregates are required, such as provided by many dense siliceous
rocks. The thickness of the ballast can vary from as low as 150 mm for lightly trafficked rail-
roads up to 500 mm on railroads that carry high-speed trains or heavy traffic. The blanketing
layer of sand normally has a minimum thickness of 150 mm.
Under repeated loading, differential permanent strains develop in the ballast of a rail track
that bring about a change in the rail line and level. If the voids in the ballast are allowed to fill
with fine-grained material, then a failure condition can develop. The fines may be derived by
pumping from the sub-ballast or subgrade if these become saturated. Accordingly, railway
track ballast requires regular attention to maintain line and level.
Bridges
As with tunnels, the location of bridges may be predetermined by the location of the route-
ways of which they form part. Consequently, this means that the ground conditions beneath
537
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
bridge locations must be adequately investigated. This is especially the case when a bridge
has to cross a river (Nichol and Wilson, 2002). The geology beneath a river should be corre-
lated with the geology on both banks, and drilling beneath the river should go deep enough
to determine the solid rock in place. The geological conditions may be complicated by the
presence of a buried channel beneath a river. Buried channels generally originated during the
Pleistocene epoch when valleys were deepened by glacial action, and sea levels were at
lower positions. Subsequently, these channels were occupied by various types of sediments,
which may include peat. The data obtained from a site investigation should enable the bridge,
piers and abutments to be designed satisfactorily.
The ground beneath bridge piers has to support not only the dead load of the bridge but also
the live load of the traffic that the bridge will carry, in addition to accommodating the horizontal
thrust of the river water when bridges cross rivers. The choice of foundations usually is
influenced by a number of factors. For example, the existence of sound rock near the surface
allows spread foundations to be used without the need for widespread piling, whereas piled
foundations are adopted for flood plains and rivers where alluvial deposits overlie bedrock
(Kitchener and Ellison, 1997). Because of the strong currents and the high tidal range in an
estuary, precast concrete open-bottom caissons, which are floated out and put in place by
specially adapted barges, may be used for piers. Such caissons provide permanent formwork
shells for the concrete infill. Alternatively, piers can be designed as cellular structures
supported by cylindrical caissons.
The anchorages for suspension bridges have to resist very high pull-out loads. For example,
the Hessle anchorage, on the north side of the river, for the Humber Bridge, England, has
to resist a horizontal pull of 38,000 tonnes. Resistance is derived from friction at the soil
or rock/concrete interface at the base of the anchorage, from the passive resistance at the
front and from wedge action at the sides.
When a bridge is constructed across a river, the effective cross-sectional area of the river is
reduced by the piers, which leads to an increase in its velocity of flow. This and the occur-
rence of eddies around the piers enhances scouring action. Less scouring generally takes
place where a river bed is formed of cobbles and gravels than where it is formed of sand
or finer-grained material. Scouring of river bed materials around bridge piers has caused
some bridges to fail. During floods, damage is caused by very high peak flows, by build-up
of debris at the bridge and by excessive scour around supporting caissons/piers (Fig. 8.9).
The problem of scouring is accentuated in estuaries, especially where the flow patterns of the
ebb and flood tides are different.
Bridges obviously are affected by ground movements such as subsidence. Subsidence
movements can cause relative displacements in all directions and therefore subject a bridge
538
Chapter 9
to tensile and compressive stresses. Although a bridge can have a rigid design to resist such
ground movements, it usually is more economic to articulate it, thereby reducing the effects
of subsidence.In the case of multi-span bridges, the piers should be hinged at the top and
bottom to allow for tilting or change in length. Jacking sockets can be used to maintain the
level of the deck. As far as shallow, abandoned room and pillar workings are concerned,
it usually is necessary to fill voids beneath a bridge with grout.
Seismic forces in earthquake-prone regions can cause damage to bridges and must therefore
be considered in bridge design (Fig. 9.24). Most seismic damage to low bridges has been
caused by failures of substructures resulting from large ground deformation or liquefaction
(Kubo and Katayama, 1978). Indeed, it appears that the worst damage is sustained by
bridges located on soft ground, especially that capable of liquefaction. Failure or subsidence
of backfill in a bridge approach, leading to an abrupt change in profile, can prevent traffic from
using the approach even if the bridge is undamaged. Such failure frequently exerts large
enough forces on abutments to cause damage to substructures. On the other hand, seismic
damage to superstructures due purely to the effects of vibrations is rare. Nonetheless, as
a result of substructure failure, damage can occur within bearing supports and hinges, which
combined with excessive movement of substructures, can bring about the collapse of
a superstructure. By contrast, the effects of vibrations can be responsible for catastrophic
failures of high bridges that possess relatively little overall stiffness. Arch-type bridges are the
strongest, whereas simple or cantilever beam type bridges are the most vulnerable to seismic
effects. Furthermore, the greater the height of substructures and the greater the number of spans,
the more likely is a bridge to collapse.
Foundations for Buildings
Types of Foundation Structure
The design of foundations embodies three essential operations, namely, calculating the loads to
be transmitted by the foundation structure to the soils or rocks supporting it, determining the engi-
neering performance of these soils and rocks, and then designing a suitable foundation structure.
Footings distribute the load to the ground over an area sufficient to suit the pressures to the
properties of the soil or rock. Their size therefore is governed by the strength of the founda-
tion materials. If the footing supports a single column, it is known as a spread or pad footing,
whereas a footing, beneath a wall is referred to as a strip or continuous footing.
The amount and rate of settlement of a footing due to a given load per unit area of its base
is a function of the dimensions of the base, and of the compressibility and permeability of the
539
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
foundation materials located between the base and a depth that is at least one and a half
times the width of the base. If footings are to be constructed on cohesive soil, it is necessary
to determine whether or not the soil is likely to swell or shrink according to any seasonal
variations. Fortunately, significant variations below a depth of about 2 m are rather rare.
Footings usually provide the most economical type of foundation structure, but the allowable
bearing capacity must be available to provide an adequate factor of safety against shear
failure in the soil and to ensure that settlements are not excessive. Settlement for any given
pressure increases with the width of footing in almost direct proportion on clays and to
a lesser degree on sands.
A raft permits the construction of a satisfactory foundation in materials whose strength is
too low for the use of footings. The chief function of a raft is to spread the building load over
as great an area of ground as possible and thus reduce the bearing pressure to a minimum.
In addition, a raft provides a degree of rigidity that reduces differential movements in
the superstructure. The settlement of a raft foundation does not depend on the weight of the
building that is supported by the raft. It depends on the difference between this weight and
the weight of the soil that is removed prior to the construction of the raft, provided the heave
produced by the excavation is inconsequential. A raft can be built at a sufficient depth so that
the weight of soil removed equals the weight of the building. Hence, such rafts are sometimes
called floating foundations. The success of this type of foundation structure in overcoming
difficult soil conditions has led to the use of deep raft and rigid frame basements for a number
of high buildings on clay.
When the soil immediately beneath a proposed structure is too weak or too compressible to
provide adequate support, the loads can be transferred to more suitable material at greater
depth by means of piles. Such bearing piles must be capable of sustaining the load with an
adequate factor of safety, without allowing settlement detrimental to the structure to occur.
Although these piles derive their carrying capacity from end bearing at their bases, the friction
along their sides also contributes towards this. Indeed, friction is likely to be the predominant
factor for piles in clays and silts, whereas end bearing provides the carrying capacity for piles
terminating in gravel or rock.
Piles may be divided into three main types according to the effects of their installation, namely,
displacement piles, small-displacement piles and non-displacement piles. Displacementpiles
are installed by driving and so their volume has to be accommodated below ground by
vertical and lateral displacements of soil that may give rise to heave or compaction, which
may have detrimental effects on any neighbouring structures. Driving also may cause piles
that are already installed to lift. Driving piles into clay may affect its consistency. In other
words, the penetration of the pile, combined with the vibrations set up by the falling hammer,
540
Chapter 9
destroy the structure of the clay and initiate a new process of consolidation that drags the
piles in a downward direction, indeed they may settle on account of their contact with the
remoulded mass of clay even if they are not loaded. Sensitive clays are affected in this way,
whereas insensitive clays are not. Small displacement piles include some piles that may be
used in soft alluvial ground of considerable depth. They also may be used to withstand uplift
forces. They are not suitable in stiff clays or gravels. Non-displacement piles are formed by
boring and the hole may be lined with casing that is or is not left in place. When working near
existing structures that are founded on loose sands or silts, particularly if these are saturated,
it is essential to avoid the use of methods that cause dangerous vibrations that may give rise
to a quick condition.
For practical purposes, the ultimate bearing capacity may be taken as that load which causes
the head of the pile to settle 10% of the pile diameter. The ratio between the settlement of
a pile foundation and that of a single pile acted upon by the design load can have almost any
value. This is due to the fact that the settlement of an individual pile depends only on the
nature of the soil in direct contact with the pile, whereas the settlement of a pile foundation
also depends on the number of piles and on the compressibility of the soil located between
the level of the tips of the piles and the surface of the bedrock.
Bearing Capacity
Foundation design is concerned primarily with ensuring that movements of a foundation
are kept within limits that can be tolerated by the proposed structure without adversely affect-
ing its functional requirements. Hence, the design of a foundation structure requires an
understanding of the local geological and groundwater conditions and, more particularly, an
appreciation of the various types of ground movement that can occur.
In order to avoid shear failure or substantial shear deformation of the ground, the foundation
pressures used in design should have an adequate factor of safety when compared with
the ultimate bearing capacity of the foundation. The ultimate bearing capacity is the value
of the loading intensity that causes the ground to fail in shear. If this is to be avoided, then
a factor of safety must be applied to the ultimate bearing capacity, the value obtained being
the maximum safe bearing capacity. But even this value may still mean that there is a risk
of excessive or differential settlement. Thus, the allowable bearing capacity is the value that
is used in design, also taking into account all possibilities of ground movement, and so its
value is normally less than that of the safe bearing capacity. The value of ultimate bearing
capacity depends on the type of foundation structure as well as on the soil properties.
For example, the dimensions, shape and depth at which a footing is placed all influence
the bearing capacity. More specifically, the width of a foundation is important in sands;
541
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.28
Foundation failure.
the greater the width, the larger the bearing capacity, whereas it is of little effect in saturated
clays. With uniform soil conditions, the ultimate bearing capacity increases with depth of
installation of the foundation structure. This increase is associated with the confining effects
of the soil, the decreased overburden pressure at foundation level and with the shear forces
that can be mobilized between the sides of the foundation structure and the ground.
There are usually three stages in the development of a foundation failure. Firstly, the soil
beneath the foundation is forced downwards in a wedge-shaped zone (Fig. 9.28).
Consequently, the soil beneath the wedge is forced downwards and outwards, elastic bulging
and distortion taking place within the soil mass. Secondly, the soil around the foundation perime-
ter pulls away from the foundation, and the shear forces propagate outward from the apex of the
wedge. This is the zone of radial shear in which plastic failure by shear occurs. Thirdly, if the soil
is very compressible or can endure large strains without plastic flow, then the failure is confined
to fan-shaped zones of local shear. The foundation displaces downwards with little load increase.
On the other hand, if the soil is more rigid, the shear zone propagates outward until a continu-
ous surface of failure extends to ground surface and the surface heaves.
The weight of the material in the passive zone resists the lifting force and provides the reac-
tion through the other two zones that counteract the downward motion of the foundation
structure (Fig. 9.28). Hence, the bearing capacity is a function of the resistance to the uplift
of the passive zone. This, in turn, varies with the size of the zone (which is a function of the inter-
nalangle of friction), with the unit weight of the soil and with the sliding resistance along the
lower surface of the zone (which is a function of the cohesion, internal angle of friction and
unit weight of the soil). A surcharge placed on the passive zone or an increase in the depth
of the foundation therefore increases the bearing capacity.
The stress distribution due to a structure declines rapidly with depth within the soil. It should
be determined in order to calculate the bearing capacity and settlement at given depths.
542
Chapter 9
The pressure acting between the bottom of a foundation structure and the soil is the contact
pressure. The assumption that a uniformly loaded foundation structure transmits the load
uniformly so that the ground is uniformly stressed is by no means valid. For example, the inten-
sity of the stresses at the edges of a rigid foundation structure on hard clay is theoretically
infinite. In fact, the clay yields slightly and so reduces the stress at the edges. As the load is
increased, more and more local yielding of the ground material takes place until, when the
loading is close to that which would cause failure, the distribution is probably very nearly
uniform. Therefore, at working loads, a uniformly loaded foundation structure on clay imposes
a widely varying contact pressure. On the other hand, a rigid footing on the surface of dry sand
imposes a parabolic distribution of pressure. Since there is no cohesion in such material, no
stress can develop at the edges of a footing. If the footing is below the surface of the sand,
then the pressure at the edge is no longer zero but increases with depth. The pressure
distribution tends therefore to become more nearly uniform as the depth increases. If a
footing is perfectly flexible, then it will distribute a uniform load over any type of foundation
material.
The ultimate bearing capacity of foundations on coarse soils depends on the width and depth
of placement of the foundation structure as well as the angle of shearing resistance. The posi-
tion of the water table in relation to the foundation structure has an important influence on the
ultimate bearing capacity. High groundwater levels lower the effective stresses in the ground,
so that the ultimate bearing capacity is reduced by anything up to 50%. Generally speaking,
gravels and dense sands afford good foundations. It is possible to estimate the bearing
capacity of such soils from plate load tests or penetration tests. However, loosely packed
sands are likely to undergo settlement when loaded.
The ultimate bearing capacity of foundations on clay soils depends on the shear strength
of the soil and the shape and depth at which the foundation structure is placed. The shear
strength of clay is, in turn, influenced by its consistency. Although there is a small decrease
in the moisture content of clay beneath a foundation structure, which gives rise to a small
increase in soil strength, this is of no importance as far as estimation of the factor of safety
against shear is concerned. Saturated clays in relation to applied stress behave as cohesive
materials provided that no change of moisture content occurs. Thus, when a load is applied
to saturated clay, it produces excess pore water pressures that are not dissipated quickly.
In other words, the angle of shearing resistance is equal to zero. The assumption that f=0
forms the basis of all normal calculations of the ultimate bearing capacity in clays (Skempton,
1951). The strength then may be taken as the undrained shear strength or one half the
unconfined compressive strength. To the extent that consolidation does occur, the results
of analyses based on the premise that f=0 are on the safe side. Only in special cases, with
prolonged loading periods or with very silty clays, is the assumption sufficiently far from the
truth to justify a more elaborate analysis.
543
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
For all types of foundation structures on clays, the factors of safety must be adequate against
bearing capacity failure. Generally speaking, experience has indicated that it is desirable to
use a factor of safety of 3; yet, although this means that complete failure almost invariably is
ruled out, settlement may still be excessive. It therefore is necessary to give consideration
to the settlement problem if bearing capacity is to be viewed correctly. More particularly, it is
important to make a reliable estimate of the amount of differential settlement that may be
experienced by a structure. If the estimated differential settlement is excessive, it may be
necessary to change the layout or type of foundation structure.
If a rock mass contains few defects, the allowable contact pressure at the surface may be
taken conservatively as the unconfined compressive strength of the intact rock. Most rock
masses, however, are affected by joints or weathering that may significantly alter their
strength and engineering behaviour. The great variation in the physical properties of weath-
ered rock and the non-uniformity of the extent of weathering, even at a single site, permit few
generalizations concerning the design and construction of foundation structures. The depth
to bedrock and the degree of weathering must be determined. If the weathered residuum
plays the major role in the regolith, rock fragments being of minor consequence, then the
design of rafts or footings should be according to the matrix material. Piles can provide
support at depth.
Settlement
The average values of settlement beneath a structure, together with the individual settlements
experienced by its various parts, influence the degree to which the structure serves its purpose.
The damage attributable to settlement can range from complete failure of the structureto slight
disfigurement (Fig. 9.29).
If coarse soils are densely packed, then they are almost incompressible. For example,
recorded settlements for footings on coarse soils often are of the order of 25 mm or less and
rarely exceed 50 mm. In fact, the commonly accepted basis of design is that the total settlement
of a footing should be restricted to about 25 mm, as by so doing the differential settlement
between adjacent footings is confined within limits that can be tolerated by a structure.
Loosely packed sand located above the water table undergoes some settlement but is other-
wise stable. Greater settlement is likely to be experienced where foundation level is below
the water table. Additional settlement may occur if the water table fluctuates or the ground is
subjected to vibrations. Settlement commonly is relatively rapid, but there can be a significant
time lag when stresses are large enough to produce appreciable grain fracturing. Nonetheless,
settlement in sands and gravels frequently is substantially complete by the end of the
construction period.
544
Chapter 9
Figure 9.29
Settlement of a building on clay, Goteborg, Sweden. Note the window frames are twisted somewhat and the lower ones boarded up;
the shearing in the brickwork, especially beneath the second floor windows; and the slope on the down-comer.
Settlement can present a problem in clayey soils, so that the amount that is likely to take
place when they are loaded needs to be determined. Settlement invariably continues after the
construction period, often for several years. Immediate or elastic settlement is that which
occurs under constant-volume (undrained) conditions when clay deforms to accommodate
the imposed shear stresses. Primary consolidation in clay takes place due to the void space
being gradually reduced as the pore water and/or air are expelled therefrom on loading.
The rate at which this occurs depends on the rate at which the excess pore water pressure,
induced by a structural load, is dissipated, thereby allowing the structure to be supported
entirely by the soil skeleton. Consequently, the permeability of the clay is all important.
After sufficient time has elapsed, excess pore water pressures approach zero, but a deposit
of clay may continue to decrease in volume. This is referred to as secondary consolidation
and involves compression of the soil fabric.
Settlement is rarely a limiting condition in foundations on most fresh rocks. Consequently,
it does not entail special study except in the case of special structures where settlements
545
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
must be small. The problem then generally resolves itself into one of reducing the unit–bearing
load by widening the base of a structure or using spread footings. In some cases, appreciable
differential settlements are provided for by designing articulated structures capable of taking
differential movements of individual sections without damaging the structure. Severe settle-
ments, however, may take place in low grade compaction shale.
Generally, uniform settlements can be tolerated without much difficulty, but large settlements
are inconvenient and may cause serious disturbance to services, even where there is no
evident damage to the structure. However, differential settlement is of greater significance
than maximum settlement since the former is likely to distort or even shear a structure.
Buildings that suffer large maximum settlement also are likely to experience large differential
settlement. Therefore, both should be avoided.
Burland and Wroth (1975) accepted a safe limit for angular distortion (difference in settlement
between two points) of 1:500 as satisfactory for framed buildings, but stated that it was
unsatisfactory for buildings with load-bearing walls. Damage in the latter has occurred with
very much smaller angular distortions. The rate at which settlement occurs also influences
the amount of damage suffered.
For most buildings, it is the relative deflections that occur after completion that cause damage.
Therefore, the ratio between the immediate and total settlement is important. In overconsolidated
clays, this averages about 0.6, whereas it usually is less than 0.2 for normally consolidatedclay.
This low value coupled with larger total settlement makes the problems of design for normally
consolidated clays much more demanding than for overconsolidated clays.
Settlements may be reduced by the correct design of the foundation structure. This may
include larger or deeper foundations. Also, settlements can be reduced if the site is preloaded
or surcharged prior to construction or if the soil is subjected to dynamic compaction or
vibrocompaction. It is advantageous if the maximum settlement of large structures is reached
earlier than later. The installation of sandwicks or band drains, which provide shorter drainage
paths for the escape of water to strata of higher permeability, is one means by which this can
be achieved. Sandwicks and band drains may effect up to 80% of the total settlement in
cohesive soils during the construction stage. Differential settlement also can be accommo-
dated by methods similar to those used to accommodate subsidence (Anon, 1975b).
Subsidence
Subsidence can be regarded as the vertical component of ground movement caused by
mining operations although there also is a horizontal component. Subsidence can and does
546
Chapter 9
have serious effects on buildings, services and communications; can be responsible for
flooding; lead to the sterilization of land; or call for extensive remedial measures or
special constructional design in site development. An account of subsidence is provided in
Chapter 8.
Methods of ground treatment
In recent years, there has been an increase in the extent to which the various methods
of ground treatment have been used to improve subsurface conditions. Some of these
techniques are not new but, in the past, they were used more as desperate remedies for
dealing with unforeseen problems connected with poor ground conditions, whereas today
they are recognized as part of a normally planned construction process.
Grouting refers to the process of injecting setting fluids under pressure into fissures, pores
and cavities in the ground. It may either be preplanned or an emergency expedient. The process
is used widely in foundation engineering in order to increase the mechanical performanceor to
reduce the seepage of water in the soils or rocks concerned.
If the strengthening and sealing actions are to be successful, then grout must extend
a significant distance into the formation. This is achieved by injecting the grout into a
special array of groutholes and is referred to as permeation grouting. Permeation grouting is
the most commonly used method of grouting, in which the groutability and therefore the
choice of grout is influenced by the void sizes in the ground to be treated. Normally, cement
or cement–clay grouts are used in coarser soils and clay–chemical or chemical grouts are
used in finer soils. The limits for penetration of particulate grouts generally are regarded
as a 10:1 size factor between the D of the grout and the D size of the granular system
15 15
to be injected. Generally, particulate grouts are limited to soils with pore dimensions
greater than 0.2 mm (Fig. 9.30). Ordinary Portland cement will not penetrate fine sand.
Because chemical grouts are non-particulate, their penetrability depends primarily on their
viscosity.
Cement grout cannot enter a fissure smaller than about 0.1 mm. In fissured rocks, the D of
85
the grout must be smaller than one-third the fissure width. There is an upper limit to this ratio
as large quantities of grout have been lost from sites via open fissures. The shape of an
opening also affects groutability. For the grout to achieve effective adhesion, the sides of the
fissures or voids must be clean. If they are coated with clay, then they need to be washed
prior to grouting. Cavities in rocks may have to be filled with bulk grouts (usually mixtures of
cement, pulverized fly ash and sand; gravel may be added when large openings need filling)
or foam grouts (cement grout to which a foaming agent is added).
547
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Figure 9.30
Soil particle size limitations on grout permeation.
Vibroflotation is used to improve poor ground below foundation structures. The process may
reduce settlement by more than 50%, and the shearing strength of treated soils is increased
substantially. Vibrations of appropriate form can eliminate intergranular friction of coarse
soils, so that those initially packed loosely can be converted into a dense state. A vibroflot is
used to penetrate the coarse soil and can operate efficiently below the water table. The best
results have been obtained in fairly coarse sands that contain little or no silt or clay, since
these reduce the effectiveness of the vibroflot.
However, today it is more usual to form columns of coarse backfill, formed at individual
compaction centres, to stiffen soils. The vibroflot is used to compact these columns that, in
turn, effect a reduction in settlement. Since the granular backfill replaces the soil, this process
is sometimes known as vibroreplacement (Fig. 9.31). Vibroreplacement is commonly used in
soft, normally consolidated compressible clays, saturated silts, and alluvial and estuarine
soils. Stone columns have been formed successfully in soils with undrained cohesive
strengths as low as 7 kPa. Vibrodisplacement involves the vibroflot penetrating the ground by
shearing and displacing the ground around it, and then forming stone columns. It accordingly is
restricted to strengthening insensitive clay soils that have sufficient cohesion to maintain a
stable hole, that is, to those over 20 kPa undrained strength. These soils require treatment
primarily to boost their bearing capacity, the displacement method inducing some measurable
increase in the strength of the soil between the columns. Stone columns encapsulated in
geofabric reinforcement may be used to transmit foundation loads below collapsible soils
at the surface to suitable bearing strata beneath (Ayadat and Hanna, 2005).
Dynamic compaction brings about an improvement in the mechanical properties of a soil
by the repeated application of very high intensity impacts to the surface. This is achieved
by dropping a large weight, typically 10–20 tonnes, from a crawler crane from heights of
548
Chapter 9
Figure 9.31
Formation of a stone column by vibrocompaction. (a) Sinking the vibrator into the soil to the depth where sufficient load-bearing
capacity is encountered, (b) Aggregates are placed into the hole made by the vibrator and after each filling the vibrator is
sunk again into the hole, (c) It is necessary to repeat this process as many times as may be required to achieve a degree
of compaction of the surrounding soil and the aggregates as to ensure that no further penetration of the vibrator can be effected.
Figure 9.32
Dynamic compaction.
549
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
15–40 m at regular intervals across the surface (Fig. 9.32). Repeated passes are made
over a site, although several tampings may be made at each imprint during a pass. Each
imprint is backfilled after tamping. The first pass at widely spaced centres improves the
bottom layer of the treatment zone, and the subsequent passes then consolidate the upper
layers. In finer materials, the increased pore water pressures must be allowed to dissipate
between passes, which may take several weeks. Care must be taken in establishing the
treatment pattern, tamping energies and the number of passes for a particular site, and this
should be accompanied by in situ testing as the work proceeds. Coarse granular fill requires
more energy to overcome the possibility of bridging action, for similar depths, than finer
material. Before subjecting sites that previously have been built over to dynamic compaction,
underground services, cellars, etc., should be located. Old foundations should be demolished
to about 1 m depth below the proposed new foundation level prior to compaction.
Lime or cement columns can be used to enhance the carrying capacity and reduce the
settlement of sensitive soils. Indeed, the lime column method often can be used economically
when the maximum bearing capacity of conventional piles cannot be fully mobilized (Broms,
1991). In such instances, they can be used to support a thin floor slab that carries lightweight
buildings. Lime or cement columns are installed by a tool reminiscent of a giant eggbeater,
the tool being screwed into the ground to the required depth. The rotation is then reversed,
and lime or cement slurry is forced into the soil by compressed air from openings just above
the blades of the tool. The strength and rate of increase in strength of the columns are
influenced by the curing conditions.
550
Suggestions for Further Reading
General Engineering Geology
Anon. 1976. Manual of Applied Geology for Engineering. Institution of Civil Engineers, Telford Press,
London.
Attewell, P.B. and Farmer, I.W. 1976. Principles of Engineering Geology. Chapman and Hall, London.
Bell, F.G. 1980. Engineering Geology and Geotechnics. Butterworths, London.
Bell, F.G. 1983. Fundamentals of Engineering Geology. Butterworths, London, (Indian edition published
by B.S. Publications, Hyderabad, 2005).
Legget, R.F. and Karrow, P.F. 1983. Handbook of Geology in Civil Engineering. McGraw Hill, New York.
Legget, R.F. and Hatheway, A.W. 1988. Geology and Engineering. Third Edition. McGraw Hill, New York.
Krynine, P.D. and Judd, W.R. 1956. Principles of Engineering Geology andGeotechnics. McGraw Hill,
New York.
Paige, S. (Ed.). 1950. Applications of Geology to Engineering Practice. Berkey Volume. Geological
Society of America, New York.
Rahn, P.R. 1996. Engineering Geology: An Environmental Approach. Second Edition, Elsevier,
New York.
Trask, P.D. (Ed.). 1950. Applied Sedimentation. Wiley, New York.
Zaruba, Q. and Mencl, V. 1976. Engineering Geology. Academia, Prague.
Rock Types and Stratigraphy
Anon. 1971. The Surveillance and Prediction of Volcanic Activity.UNESCO, Paris.
Anon. 1976. Disaster Prevention and Mitigation, Volume 1, Volcanological Aspects. United Nations,
New York.
Braithwaite, C. 2005. Carbonate Sediments and Rocks. Whittles Publishing, Dunbeath, Scotland.
Dunbar, C.O. and Rodgers, J. 1957. Principles of Stratigraphy, Wiley, New York.
Firth, C.R. and McGuire, W.J. (Eds.). 1999. Volcanoes in the Quaternary. Special Publication No. 161,
Geological Society, London.
Friedman, G.M., Sanders, J.E. and Kopaska-Merkel, D.C. 1992. Principles of Sedimentary Deposits.
Macmillan Publishing Co., New York.
Fry, N. 1991. The Field Description of Metamorphic Rocks. Wiley, Chichester.
Grim, R.E. 1962. Applied Clay Mineralogy. McGraw Hill, New York.
Hall, A. 1996. Igneous Petrology. Second Edition. Longman Group Ltd, Harlow, Essex.
Krumbein, W.C. and Sloss, L.L. 1963. Stratigraphy and Sedimentation. Second Edition. W.H. Freeman
and Co., San Francisco.
MacDonald, G.A. 1972. Volcanoes.Prentice-Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Pettijohn, F.J. 1975. Sedimentary Rocks. Harper and Row, New York.
Potter, P.E., Maynard, J.B. and Depetris, J.P. 2005. Muds and Mudstones. Springer-Verlag, Heidelburg.
Rittmann, A. 1962. Volcanoes and their Activity.Translated by Vincent, E.A., Interscience, London.
Shrock, R.R. 1948. Sequence in Layered Rocks. McGraw Hill, New York.
Thorpe, R.S. and Brown, G.C. 1991. The Field Description of Igneous Rocks. Wiley, Chichester.
Tucker, M.E. 2003. The Field Description of Sedimentary Rocks. Third Edition. Wiley. Chichester.
Geological Structures
Billings, M.P. 1962. Structural Geology. Prentice-Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Hobbs, B., Means, W.D. and Williams, P.F. 1976. An Outline of Structural Geology. Wiley, New York.
Parks, R.G. 1997. Foundations of Structural Geology. Chapman and Hall, London.
551
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Price, N.L. 1966. Fault and Joint Development in Brittle and Semi-Brittle Rock. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Ramsey, J.G. 1967. Folding and Fracturing of Rocks. McGraw Hill, London.
Surface Processes
Anderson, M.G. and Richards, K.S. (Eds.). 1987. Slope Stability,Wiley, New York.
Bagnold, R.A. 1941. Physics of Windblown Sand. Methuen, London.
Baker, V.R., Kochel, R.C. and Patton, P.C. (Eds.). 1988. Flood Geomorphology,Wiley, New York.
Bascom, W. 1964. Waves and Beaches.Doubleday and Co., New York.
Bell, F.G. 1999. Geological Hazards: Their Assessment, Avoidance and Mitigation. Spon Press, London.
Beven, K. and Carling, F. (Eds.). 1989. Floods: Hydrological, Sedimentological and Geomorphological
Implications.Wiley, Chichester.
Bolt, B.A., Horn, W.L., McDonald, G.A. and Scott, R.F. 1975. Geological Hazards. Springer-Verlag,
New York.
Bridge, J. 2003. Rivers and Flood Plains, Processes and Sedimentary Record. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Bromhead, E.N. 1992. The Stability of Slopes. Second Edition. Blackie, Glasgow.
Brookes, A. 1988. Channelized Rivers; Perspectives for Environmental Management.Wiley, Chichester.
Brunsden, D. and Prior, D.B. (Eds.). 1984. Slope Instability. Wiley-Interscience, Chichester.
Bull, L.J. and Kirkby, M.J. 2002. Dryland Rivers. Wiley, Chichester.
Coates, D.R. (Ed.). 1976. Geomorphology and Engineering. Allen and Unwin, London.
Cooke, R.M. and Warren, A. 1973. Geomorphology in Deserts. Batsford, London.
Cruden, D.M. and Fell, R. (Eds.). 1997. Landslide Risk Assessment. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Derbyshire, E., Gregory, K.J. and Hails, J.R. 1981. Geomorphological Processes. Butterworths, London.
Duff, P. McL. D. (Ed.). 1993.Holmes’ Principles of Physical Geology. Fourth Edition. Chapman and Hall,
London.
El-Sabh, M.I. and Murty, T.S. (Eds.). 1988. Natural and Man-Made Hazards.D. Riedel Publishing Co.,
Dordrecht.
Embleton, C. and King, C.A.M. 1968. Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology. Arnold, London.
Eyles, N. (Ed.). 1983. Glacial Geology: An Introduction for Engineers and Earth Scientists. Pergamon
Press, Oxford.
Flint, R.F. 1967. Glacial and Pleistocene Geology. Wiley, New York.
Fookes, P.G., Gilligan, G. and Lee, M. (Eds.). 2005. Geomorphology for Engineers. Whittles Publishing
Services, Caithness.
Ford, D.C. and Williams, P.W. 2006. Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology. Wiley, Chichester.
French, P.W. 2001. Coastal Defences: Processes, Problems and Solutions. Routledge, London.
Glade, T., Anderson, M.G. and Crozier, M.J. 2005. Landslide Hazard and Risk. Wiley, New York.
Glennie, K.W. 1970. Desert Sedimentary Environments. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Gregory, K.J. and Walling, D.E. 1973. Drainage Basin Forms and Process, a Geomorphological
Approach.Edward Arnold, London.
Hails, J.R. (Ed.). 1977. Applied Geomorphology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Ingle, J.G. 1966. Movement of Beach Sand. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
King, C.A.M. 1976. Beaches and Coasts. Arnold, London.
Komar, P.O. 1976. Beach Processes and Sedimentation. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey.
Leopold, L.B., Wolman, M.G. and Miller, L.P. 1964. Fluvial Processes in Geomorphology. Freeman and
Co., San Francisco.
McCall, G.J.H., Laming, D.J.C. and Scott, S.C. (Eds.). 1992. Geohazards: Natural and Man-Made.
Chapman and Hall, London.
Maund, J.G. and Eddleston, M. (Eds.). 1998. Geohazards in Engineering Geology, Engineering Geology
Special Publication No. 15. Geological Society, London.
Milanovic, P.T. 2000. Geological Engineering in Karst. Zebra, Belgrade.
Muir Wood, A.M. and Flemming, C.A. 1981. Coastal Hydraulics.Second Edition, Macmillan, London.
Muller, S.W. 1947. Permafrost or Permanently Frozen Ground and Related Engineering Problems.
Edward Bros., Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Newson, M.D. 1994. Hydrology and the River Environment.Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Ollier, C.D. 1984. Weathering. Longman, Harlow.
Pilarczyk, K.W. (Ed.). 1990. Coastal Protection.A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
552
Suggestions for Further Reading
Reeve, D., Chadwick, A. and Fleming, C. 2004. Coastal Engineering: Processes, Theory and Design
Practice. Spon Press, London.
Silvester, R. 1974. Coastal Engineering. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Thorn, R.B. and Simmons, J.C.F. 1971. Sea Defence Works. Butterworth, London.
Tufnell, L. 1984. Glacial Hazards. Longman, Harlow, Essex.
Turner, A.K. and Schuster, R.L. (Eds.). 1996. Landslide Investigation and Mitigation. Transportation
Research Board, Special Report 247, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Varnes, D.J. 1984. Landslide Hazard Zonation: A Review of Principles and Practice,Natural Hazards 3.
UNESCO, Paris.
Veder, C. 1981. Landslides and Their Stabilization. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Verstappen, J. Th. 1983. Applied Geomorphology: Geomorphological Surveys for Environmental
Development. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Waltham, A.C., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. 2005. Sinkholes and Subsidence: Karst and Cavernous
Rocks in Engineering and Construction. Praxis Press/Springer, Chichester/Berlin.
Ward, R. 1978. Floods. Macmillan, London.
Washburn, A.L. 1973. Periglacial Processes and Environments. Arnold, London.
Wilson, E.M. 1983. Engineering Hydrology. Third Edition. Macmillan, London.
Zaruba, Q. and Mencl, V. 1985. Landslides and Their Control. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Groundwater
Anon. 1993. Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Anon. 1980. Directive Relating to the Quality of Water intended for Human Consumption (80/778/EEC).
Commission of the European Community, Brussels.
Assaad, F., LaMoreaux, P.E. and Hughes, T. 2004. Field Methods for Geologists and Hydrogeologists.
Springer, Berlin.
Bisson, R.A. and Lehr, J.H. 2004. Modern Groundwater Exploration. Wiley, New York.
Brassington, R. 1988. Field Hydrogeology. Wiley, Chichester.
Brodie, M.J., Broughton, L.M. and Robertson, A. 1989. British Columbia Acid Mine Drainage Task Force,
Draft Technical Guide.Steffan, Robertson and Kirsten, Vancouver.
Brown, R.H., Konoplyantsev, A.A., Ineson, J and Kovalevsky, V.S. (Eds.). 1972. Groundwater Studies.
An International Guide for Research and Practice, Studies and Reports in Hydrology 7, UNESCO, Paris.
Cripps, J.C., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. (Eds.). 1986. Groundwater in Engineering Geology.
Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 3. The Geological Society, London.
Davis, S.N. and De Weist, R.J.H. 1966. Hydrogeology. Wiley, New York.
De Weist, R.J.H. 1967. Geohydrology. Wiley, New York.
Fetter, C.W. 2001. Applied Hydrogeology. Fourth Edition, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Freeze, R.A. and Cherry, J.A. 1979. Groundwater. Prentice-Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Hamill, L. and Bell, F.G. 1986. Groundwater Resource Development. Butterworth, London.
Hem, J.D. 1985. Study and Interpretation of the Chemical Characteristics of Natural Water. Water Supply
Paper 2254, United States Geological Survey, Washington, DC.
Hiscock, K.M. 2002. Sustainable Groundwater Development. Special Publication 193, Geological
Society, London.
Linsley, R.K. and Franzini, J.B. 1972. Water Resourses Engineering. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Price, M. 1985. Introducing Groundwater. Allen and Unwin, London.
Robins, N.S. (Ed.). 1998. Groundwater Pollution, Aquifer Recharge and Vulnerability, Special Publication
No. 130. Geological Society, London.
Schwartz, F.W. and Zhang, H. 2003. Fundamentals of Ground Water. Wiley, New York.
Todd, D.K. and Mays, L.W. 2004. Groundwater Hydrology. Third Edition. Wiley, New York.
Verruijt, A. 1970. The Theory of Groundwater Flow. Macmillan, London.
Walton, W.C. 1970. Groundwater Resource Evaluation. McGraw Hill, New York.
Description and Behaviour of Soils and Rocks
Anon. 1986. Guide to Rock and Soil Descriptions. Geoguide 3. Geotechnical Control Office, Government
Publication Centre, Hong Kong.
Bell, F.G. 2000. Engineering Properties of Soils and Rocks, Fourth Edition. Blackwell Scientific
Publishers, Oxford.
553
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Blight, G.E. (Ed.). 1997. Mechanics of Residual Soils. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Brand, E.W. and Brenner, R.P. (Eds.) 1981. Soft Clay Engineering. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Cripps, J.C., Culshaw, M.G., Coulthard, J.M. and Henshaw, S. 1992. Engineering Geology of
Weak Rock. Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 8, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Deere, D.M. and Miller, R.P. 1966. Engineering Classification and Index Properties for Intact Rock.
Technical Report AFWL-TR-116, Air Force Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico.
Farmer, I.W. 1983. Engineering Behaviour of Rocks. Chapman and Hall, London.
Fookes, P.G. (Ed.). 1997. Tropical Residual Soils. Geological Society, London.
Fookes, P.G. and Parry, R.H.G. (Eds.). 1994. Engineering Characteristics of Arid Soils. A.A. Balkema,
Rotterdam.
Foster, A., Culshaw, M.G., Cripps, J.C., Moon, C.F. and Little, J. (Eds.). 1991. Quaternary Engineering
Geology. Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 7, The Geological Society, London.
Gidigasu, M.D. 1976. Laterite Soil Engineering. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Goodman, R.E. 1993. Engineering Geology: Rock in Engineering Construction. Wiley, New York.
Jefferson, I., Murray, E.J., Faragher, E. and Fleming, P.R. (Eds.). 2001. Problematic Soils. Thomas
Telford Press, London.
Gillott, J.E. 1968. Clay in Engineering Geology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Mitchell, J.K. 1988. Fundamentals of Soil Behaviour. Second Edition. Wiley, New York.
Santi, P.M. and Shakoor, A. (Eds.). 1997. Characterization of Weak Rock and Weathered Rock Masses.
Special Publication No. 9. Association of Engineering Geologists, College Station, Texas.
Wilson, R.C.L. (Ed.). 1983. Residual Deposits: Surface Related Weathering Processes and Materials.
Special Publication No. 11, Geological Society, London, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford.
Geological Materials used in Construction
Keeling, P.S. 1969. The Geology and Mineralogy of Brick Clays. Brick Development Association, Stoke-
on-Trent, England.
Latham, J.-P. (Ed.). 1998. Advances in Aggregates and Armourstone Evaluation. Engineering Geology
Special Publication No. 13. Geological Society, London.
McNally, G. 1998. Soil and Rock Construction Materials. Spon Press, London.
Prentice, J.E. 1990. Geology of Construction Materials. Chapman and Hall, London.
Reeves, G.M., Sims, I. and Cripps, J.C. (Eds.). 2006. Clay Materials used in Construction. Engineering
Geology Special Publication No. 21. Geological Society, London.
Siegesmund, S., Weiss, T. and Vollbrecht, A. 2003. Natural Stone, Weathering Phenomena,
Conservation Strategies and Case Studies. Special Publication 205, Geological Society, London.
Simpson, J.L. and Horrobin, P.J. 1970. The Weathering and Performance of Building Materials. Medical
and Technical Publishing Co., Aylesbury.
Smith, M.R. and Collis, L. (Eds.). 2001. Aggregates: Sand, Gravel and Crushed Rock Aggregates. Third
Edition. Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 9. Geological Society, London.
Smith, M.R., (Ed.). 1999. Stone: Building Stone, Rock Fill and Armourstone in Construction. Engineering
Geology Special Publication No. 16, Geological Society, London.
Winkler, E.M. 1973. Stone: Properties, Durability in Man’s Environment. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Site Investigation and Engineering Geological Maps
Allum, J.A.E. 1966. Photogeology and Regional Mapping. Pergamon, London.
Anon. 1999. Code of Practice for Site Investigations. BS 5930. British Standards Institution, London.
Barnes, J.W. and Lisle, R.J. 2003. Basic Geological Mapping. Fourth Edition, Wiley, Chichester.
Bell, F.G. 1975. Site Investigations in Areas of Mining Subsidence. Newnes-Butterworths, London.
Bell, F.G., Culshaw, M.G., Cripps, J.C. and Coffey, R. (Eds.). 1990. Field Instrumentation and
Engineering Geology. Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 6, Geological Society, London.
Butler, B.C.M. and Bell, J.D. 1988. Interpretation of Geological Maps. Longman Scientific and Technical,
Harlow.
Carter, M. and Symons, M.W. 1989. Site Investigations and Foundations Explained. Pentech Press, London.
Clayton, C.R.I., Simons, N.E. and Matthews, M.C. 1996. Site Investigation: A Handbook for Engineers.
Second Edition, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford.
Craig, C. (Ed.). 1996. Advances in Site Investigation Practice. Thomas Telford Press, London.
Dearman, W.R. 1991. Engineering Geological Maps. Butterworths-Heinemann, Oxford.
554
Suggestions for Further Reading
Demek, J. 1972. Manual of Detailed Geomorphological Mapping. Academia, Prague.
Griffiths, D. and King. R.E. 1984. Applied Geophysics for Engineers and Geologists. Pergamon Press,
Oxford.
Griffiths, J.S. (Ed.). 2001. Land Surface Evaluation for Engineering Practice. Engineering Geology
Special Publication No. 18, Geological Society, London.
Griffiths, J.S. (Ed.). 2002. Mapping in Engineering Geology. Geological Society, London.
Hanna, T.H. 1985. Field Instrumentation in Geotechnical Engineering. Trans Tech Publications,
Clausthal-Zellerfeld.
Hawkins, A.B. (Ed.). 1986. Site Investigation Practice: Assessing BS 5930. Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 2, Geological Society, London.
Hvorslev, M.J. 1949. Subsurface Exploration and Sampling for Civil Engineering Purposes. American
Society of Civil Engineers Report, Waterways Experimental Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Kennie, T.J.M. and Matthews, M.C. (Eds.). 1985. Remote Sensing in Civil Engineering. Surrey University
Press, London.
Lillesland, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. and Chipman, J. 2003. Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation. Wiley,
New York.
Lahee, F.H. 1961. Field Geology. McGraw Hill, New York.
Maltman, A. 1998. Geological Maps: An Introduction. Second Edition, Wiley, Chichester.
McCann, D.M., Eddleston, D., Fenning, P.J. and Reeves, G.M. (Eds.). 1997. Modern Geophysics in
Engineering Geology. Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 12.Geological Society, London.
McClay, K.R. 1991. The Mapping of Geological Structures. Wiley, Chichester.
McDowell, P.W. et al. 2002. Geophysics in Engineering Investigations. Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 19, Geological Society, Construction Industry Research and Information Association
(CIRIA), London.
Milson, J. 2002. Field Geophysics. Third Edition, Wiley, Chichester.
Paine, D.P. and Kiser, J.D. 2003. Aerial Photography and Image Interpretation. Wiley, New York.
Reynolds, J.M. 2004. An Introduction to Applied and Environmental Geophysics.Second Edition, Wiley,
Chichester.
Sabins, F.F. 1996. Remote Sensing – Principles and Interpretation. Second Edition, Freeman and Co.,
San Francisco.
Sharma, P.V. 1997. Environmental and Engineering Geophysics.Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Simons, N.E., Menzies, B.K. and Matthews, M.C. 2001. A Short Course in Geotechnical Site
Investigation. Thomas Telford Press, London.
Weltman, A.J. and Head, J.M. 1983. Site Investigation Manual. Construction Industry Research and
Information Association, Special Publication No. 25, London.
Geology, Planning and Development
Anon. 1978. The Assessment and Mitigation of Earthquake Risk.UNESCO, Paris.
Anon. 1985. Geology for Urban Planning. Economic Commission for Asia and the Pacific. United
Nations, New York.
Bell, F.G. 1998. Environmental Geology: Principles and Practice. Blackwells, Oxford.
Bell, F.G. and Donnelly, L.J. 2006. Mining and Its Impact on the Environment. Spon Press, London.
Bell, F.G., Cripps, J.C., Culshaw, M.G. and Lovell, M.A. (Eds.). 1988. Engineering Geology of Ground
Movements, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 5, Geological Society, London.
Bolt, B.A. 1993. Earthquakes. W.H. Freeman, New York.
Borchers, J.W. (Ed.). 1998. Land Subsidence Case Studies and Current Research, Special Publication
No. 8. Association of Engineering Geologists, Star Publishing Company, Belmont, California.
Canter, L. 1977. Environmental Impact Assessment. McGraw Hill, New York.
Carroll, B. and Turpin, T. 2002. Environmental Impact Assessment Handbook. Thomas Telford Press,
London.
Cooke, R.U. and Doornkamp, J.C. 1996. Geomorphology in Environmental Management. Second
Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Crandell, D.R., Booth, B., Kusumadinata, K., Shimozuru, D., Walker, G.P.L. and Westercamp, D. 1984.
Source Book for Volcanic Hazards Zonation,UNESCO, Paris.
Culshaw, M.G., Bell, F.G., Cripps, J.C. and O’Hara, M. (Eds.). 1987. Planning and Engineering Geology.
Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 4, Geological Society, London.
555
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Dowrick, D.J. 2003. Earthquake Risk Reduction. Wiley, New York.
Genske, D.D. 2003. Urban Land: Degradation, Investigation and Remediation. Springer, Berlin.
Griggs, G.B. and Gilchrist, J.A. 1983. Geologic Hazards, Resources and Environmental Planning.
Wadsworth, Belmont, California.
Holzer, T.L. (Ed.). 1984. Man-induced Land Subsidence. Reviews in Engineering Geology. American
Geological Society, New York.
Howard, A.D. and Remson, I. 1978. Geology in Environmental Planning. McGraw Hill, New York.
Hooke, J. 2000. (Ed). Coastal Defence and Earth Science Conservation. Geological Society, London.
Latter, J.H., (Ed.). 1989. Volcanic Hazards: Assessment and Monotoring. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Legget, R.F. 1973. Cities and Geology. McGraw Hill, New York.
Levenson, D. 1980. Geology and the Urban Environment. Oxford University Press, New York.
Lomnitz, C. 1994. Fundamentals of Earthquake Prediction. Wiley, New York.
Lomnitz, C. and Rosenblueth, E. 1976. Seismic Risk and Engineering Decisions. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
McCall, G.J.H., De Mulder, E.F.J. and Marker, B.R. (Eds.). 1996. Urban Geoscience. A.A. Balkema,
Rotterdam.
Medvedev, S.V. 1965. Engineering Seismology.Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem.
Mogi, K. 1985. Earthquake Prediction. Academic Press, Orlando, Florida.
Nathanail, C.P. 2004. Reclamation of Contaminated Land. Wiley, Chichester.
Oliveira, C.S. and A.R.X. Goula. 2005. Assessing and Managing Earthquake Risk. Springer, Heidelburg.
Oweis, I.S. and Khera, R.P. 1990. Geotechnology of Waste Management. Butterworths, London.
Sara, M.N. 1994. Standard Handbook for Solids and Hazardous Waste Facility Assessments. Lewis
Publishers, Boca Raton, Florida.
Tan, B.K. and Ran, J.L. (Eds.). 1986. Landplan II: Role of Geology in Planning Land Development of
Urban Centres in Southeast Asia. Association of Geoscientists for International Development, Report
Series No. 12, Bangkok.
Utgard, R.O., McKenzie, G.D. and Foley, D. (Eds.). 1978. Geology in the Urban Environment.Burgess,
Minneapolis.
Weigel, R.L. (Ed.). 1970. Earthquake Engineering.Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Whittacker, B.N. and Reddish, D.J. 1989. Subsidence, Occurrence, Prediction and Control.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Williams, P.T. 2005. Waste Treatment and Disposal. Wiley, Chichester.
Geology and Construction
Andersland, O.B. and Ladanyi, B. 2003. Frozen Ground Engineering. Wiley, New York.
Anon. 1952. Soil Mechanics for Road Engineers. Transport and Road Research Laboratory,
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.
Anon. 1986. Code of Practice for Earthwork,BS6031.British Standards Institution, London.
Attewell, P.B and Taylor, R.K. (Eds.). 1984. Ground Movements and their Effects on Structures.Surrey
University Press, London.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. 1975. Engineering Classification of Rock Masses for the Design of
Tunnel Support.Publication No. 106, Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, Oslo.
Bell, A.L. (Ed.). 1994. Grouting in the Ground. Thomas Telford Press, London.
Bell, F.G. 1978. Foundation Engineering in Difficult Ground. Butterworths, London.
Bell, F.G. (Ed.). 1987. Ground Engineer’s Reference Book. Butterworths, London.
Bell, F.G. (Ed.). 1992. Engineering in Rock Masses. Butterworths-Heinemann, Oxford.
Bell, F.G. 1993. Engineering Treatment of Soils. Spon Press, London.
Bell, F.G. 2004. Engineering Geology and Construction. Spon Press, London.
Bieniawski, Z.T. 1989. Engineering Rock Mass Classifications. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Bickel, J.O. and Kuesel, T.R. 1982. Tunnel Engineering Handbook.Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Brady, B.H.G. and Brown, E.T. 2004. Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining. Third Edition. Springer,
Heidelburg.
Cashman, P. and Preene, M. 2001. Groundwater Lowering in Construction: a Practical Guide. Spon
Press, London.
Chandler, R.J. (Ed.). 1991. Slope Stability Engineering – Developments and Applications. Thomas
Telford Press, London.
556
Suggestions for Further Reading
Church, H.K. 1981. Excavation Handbook. McGraw Hill, New York.
Clarke, B. (Ed). 1999, Urban Ground Engineering. Thomas Telford Press, London.
Eddleston, M., Walthall, S., Cripps, J.C. and Culshaw, M.G. (Eds.). 1995. Engineering Geology of
Construction.Engineering Geology Special Publication No.10, Geological Society, London.
Fang, H-Y. (Ed.). 1991. Foundation Engineering Handbook. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Hoek, E. and Bray, J. 1981. Rock Slope Engineering. Third Edition. Institution of Mining and Metallurgy,
London.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E.T. 1980. Underground Excavations in Rock. Institution of Mining and Metallurgy,
London.
Hoek, E., Kaiser, P.K. and Bawden, W.F. 1998. Support of Underground Excavations in Hard Rock.
A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Hudson, J.A. and Harrison, J.P. 1997. Engineering Rock Mechanics: An Introduction to the Principles.
Pergamon, Oxford.
Kezdi, A. and Rethati, L. 1988. Handbook of Soil Mechanics, Volume 3: Soil Mechanics of Earthworks,
Foundations and Highway Engineering. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Langeford, U. and Kilstrom, K. 1973. The Modern Technique of Rock Blasting. Wiley, New York.
Linsley, R.K. and Franzini, J.B. 1972. Water Resources Engineering. McGraw Hill, New York.
McGregor, K. 1967. The Drilling of Rock. C R Books Ltd, A Maclaren Co., London.
Megaw. T.M. and Bartlett, J.V. 1982. Tunnels: Planning and Design. Volume 2, Methuen, London.
Morris, G.L. and Fan, J. 1997. Reservoir Sedimentation Handbook. McGraw Hill, New York.
Moseley, M. and Kirsch, K. 2004. Ground Improvement. Second Edition, Spon Press, London.
Muir Wood, A.H. 2000. Tunnelling. Spon Press, London.
Ortigao, J.A.R. and Sayao, A. 2004. Handbook of Slope Stabilisation Engineering. Springer, Berlin.
Puller, M. 1996. Deep Excavations: A Practical Manual. Thomas Telford Press, London.
Raison, C (Ed.). 2004. Ground and Soil Improvement. Thomas Telford Press, London.
Sherard, J.L., Woodward, R.L., Gizienski, S.F. and Clevenger, W.A. 1967. Earth and Earth Rock Dams.
Wiley, New York.
Simons, N.E. and Menzies, B.K. 2000. A Short Course in Foundation Engineering. Thomas Telford
Press, London.
Simons, N.E. and Menzies, B.K. 2001. A Short Course in Soil and Rock Slope Engineering. Thomas
Telford Press, London.
Sowers, G.F. 1996. Building on Sinkholes: Design and Construction of Foundations in Karst Terrain.
American Society Civil Engineers Press, New York.
Stacey, T.R. and Page, C.H. 1986. Practical Handbook for Underground Rock Mechanics. Trans Tech
Publications, Clausthal-Zelterfeld.
Szechy, K. 1966. The Art of Tunnelling. Akademiai Kiado, Budapest.
Tomlinson, M.J. 1986. Foundation Design and Construction. Fifth Edition. Longmans, London.
Walters, R.C.S. 1962. Dam Geology. Butterworths, London.
Whittacker, B.N. and Frith, R.C. 1990. Tunnelling: Design, Stability and Construction. Institution of Mining
and Metallurgy, London.
Wyllie, D.C. 1999. Foundations on Rock. Second Edition. Spon Press, London.
Wyllie, D.C. and C.H. Mah. 2004. Rock Slope Engineering. Fourth Edition, Spon Press, London.
557
This page intentionally left blank
References
Acworth, R.I. 2001. Physical and chemical properties of a DNAPL contaminated zone in a sand aquifer.
Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 34, 85–98.
Aggistalis, G.P., Alivizatos, A.S., Stamoulis, D.C. and Stournaras, G. 1996. Correlating uniaxial compres-
sive strength with Schmidt hardness, point load index, Young’s modulus and mineralogy of gabbros
and basalts (northern Greece). Bulletin International Association Engineering Geology, 54, 3–11.
Aitchison, G.O. and Wood, C.C. 1965. Some interactions of compaction, permeability and post-construction
deflocculation affecting the probability of piping failures in small dams. Proceedings Sixth International
Conference Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Montreal, 2, 442–446.
Al-Homoud, A.S. and Tubeileh, T.K. 1997. Damaging landslides of cut slopes along major highways in
Jordan: causes and remedies. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 3, 183–204.
Almeida, M.S.S., Santa Maria, P.E.L., Martins, I.S.M., Spotti, A.P. and Coelho, L.B.M. 2000.
Consolidation of a very soft clay with vertical drains. Geotechnique, 50, 633–643.
Alonso, E.E., Gens, A. and Lloret, A. 2000. Precompression design for secondary settlement.
Geotechnique, 50, 645–656.
Al-Sanad, H.A., Shagoor, F.M., Hencher, S.R. and Lumsden, A.C. 1990. The influence of changing
groundwater levels on the geotechnical behaviour of desert sands. Quarterly Journal Engineering
Geology,23, 357–364.
Andersland, O.B. 1987. Frozen ground engineering. In: Ground Engineer’s Reference Book, Bell, F.G. (Ed.),
Butterworths, London, 8/1–8/24.
Andrews, R.J., Lloyd, J.W. and Lerner, D.N. 1998. Sewage sludge disposal to agricultural land and other
options in the UK. In: Groundwater Contaminants and Their Migration, Special Publication No. 128,
Mather, J., Banks, D., Dumpleton, S. and Fermor, M. (Eds.), Geological Society, London, 63–74.
Anon. 1970. Logging of cores for engineering purposes, Engineering Group Working Party Report.
Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 3, 1–24.
Anon. 1972. The preparation of maps and plans in terms of engineering geology, Engineering Group
Working Party Report. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 5, 293–381.
Anon. 1975a. Methods for Sampling and Testing Mineral Aggregates, Sands and Fillers. British
Standards Institution, London.
Anon. 1975b. Subsidence Engineer’s Handbook. National Coal Board, London.
Anon. 1976. Engineering Geology Maps. A guide to their Preparation. UNESCO, Paris.
Anon. 1977a. The description of rock masses for engineering purposes. Engineering Group Working
Party Report, Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 10, 43–52.
Anon. 1977b. Ground Subsidence. Institution of Civil Engineers, Telford Press, London.
Anon. 1979. Classification of rocks and soils for engineering geological mapping, Part 1 – Rock and soil
materials. Report of the Commission of Engineering Geological Mapping, Bulletin International
Association of Engineering Geology, 19, 364–371.
Anon. 1980. Directive Relating to the Quality of Water intended for Human Consumption (80/778/EEC).
Commission of the European Community, Brussels.
Anon. 1981. Basic geotechnical description of rock masses. International Society of Rock Mechanics
Commission on the Classification of Rocks and Rock Masses. International Journal of Rock Mechanics
and Mining Sciences and Geomechanical Abstracts, 18, 85–110.
Anon. 1981b. Code of practice on Earthworks BS6031. British Standards Institution, London.
Anon. 1982. The Treatment of Disused Mine Shafts and Adits. National Coal Board, London.
Anon. 1983. The Selection of Natural Building Stone. Digest 260, Building Research Establishment,
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.
559
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Anon 1990a. Methods of Test for Soils for Civil Engineering Purposes, BS 1377. British Standards
Institution, London.
Anon. 1990b. Tropical residual soils, Engineering Group Working Party Report. Quarterly Journal of
Engineering Geology, 23, 1–101.
Anon. 1992. Specification for Aggregates from Natural Sources for Concrete, BS 882. British Standards
Institution, London.
Anon. 1993. Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva.
Anon. 1995. The description and classification of weathered rocks for engineering purposes. Working
Party Report. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,28, 207–242.
Anon. 1999. Code of Practice on Site Investigations, BS 5930. British Standards Institution, London.
Attewell, P.B. 1993. Ground Pollution; Environmental Geology, Engineering and Law.E. & F.N. Spon, London.
Aubeny, C.P. and Lytton, R.L. 2004. Shallow slides in compacted high plasticity clay slopes. Proceedings
American Society Civil Engineers, Journal Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 130,
717–727.
Auld, A. 1992. Shafts and raises in rock masses. In: Engineering in Rock Masses, Bell, F.G. (Ed.),
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 465–508.
Ayadat, T. and Hanna, A.M. 2005. Encapsulated stone columns as a soil improvement technique for
collapsible soil. Ground Improvement, 9, 137–147.
Bagnold, R.A. 1941. Physics of Wind Blown Sand. Methuen, London.
Bailey, D. and Gunn, J. 1991. Landform replication as an approach to the reclamation of limestone
quarries. In: Land Reclamation, an End to Dereliction, Davies, M.C.R. (Ed.), Elsevier Applied Science,
London, 96–105.
Baker, P.E. 1979. Geological aspects of volcano prediction. Journal of the Geological Society, 136,
341–346.
Barber, C. 1982. Domestic waste and leachate. Notes on Water Research No 31, Water Research
Centre, Medmenham, England.
Barton, M.E., Mockett, L.D. and Palmer, S.N. 1993. An engineering geological classification of the soil-
rock borderline between sands and sandstones. In: Engineering Geology of Weak Rocks,Engineering
Geology Special Publication No. 8, Cripps, J.C., Coulthard, J.M., Culshaw, M.G., Forster, A., Hencher,
S.R. and Moon, C.F. (Eds.), Geological Society, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 125–138.
Barton, N. 1976. The shear strength of rock and rock joints. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and
Mining Sciences and Geomechanical Abstracts, 13, 255–279.
Barton, N. 1978. Suggested methods for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses.
International Society of Rock Mechanics Commission on Standardization of Laboratory and Field
Tests, International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences and Geomechanical Abstracts,
15, 319–368.
Barton, N. 1988. Rock mass classification and tunnel reinforcement selection using the Q-system.
Proceedings Symposium on Rock Classification for Engineering Purposes, American Society for
Testing Materials, Special Technical Publication 984, Philadelphia, 59–88.
Barton, N.R. and Bandis, S.C. 1980. Some effects of scale on the shear strength of joints. International
Journal Rock Mechanics Mining Science and Geomechanical Abstracts,17, 69–76.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. 1975. Engineering Classification of Rock Masses for the Design of
Tunnel Support. Norwegian Geotechnical Institute Publication 106, Oslo.
Baynes, F.J., Fookes, P.G. and Kennedy, J.F. 2005. The total engineering geology approach applied to rail-
ways in the Pilbara, Western Australia. Bulletin Engineering Geology and the Environment, 64, 67–94.
Bell, F.G. 1978. Some petrographic factors relating to porosity and permeability in the Fell Sandstones
of Northumberland. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,11,113–126.
Bell, F.G. 1981a. A survey of the physical properties of some carbonate rocks. Bulletin International
Association Engineering Geology,24, 105–110.
Bell, F.G. 1981b. Geotechnical properties of evaporites. Bulletin International Association Engineering
Geology,24, 137–144.
Bell, F.G. 1988a. The history and techniques of coal mining and the associated effects and influence on
construction. Bulletin Association of Engineering Geologists, 24, 471–504.
Bell, F.G. 1988b. Ground movements associated with the withdrawal of fluids. In: Engineering Geology
of Underground Movements, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 5, Bell, F.G., Cripps, J.C.,
Culshaw, M.G. and Lovell, M.A., (Eds.), The Geological Society, London, 363–376.
560
References
Bell, F.G. 1988c. Land development: state-of-the-art in the search for old mine shafts. Bulletin
International Association of Engineering Geology,37, 91–98.
Bell, F.G. 1992a. The durability of sandstone as building stone, especially in urban environments. Bulletin
Association of Engineering Geologists, 24, 49–60.
Bell, F.G. 1992b. An investigation of a site in Coal Measures for brickmaking materials: an illustration of
procedures. Engineering Geology, 25, 39–52.
Bell, F.G. 1992c. Salt mining and associated subsidence in Mid-Cheshire, England, and its influence on
planning. Bulletin Association Engineering Geologists,22, 371–386.
Bell, F.G. 1993. Durability of carbonate rock as building stone with comments on its preservation.
Environmental Geology,21, 187–200.
Bell, F.G. 1994a. Floods and landslides in Natal and notably the greater Durban region, September 1987:
a retrospective view. Bulletin Association Engineering Geologists,31, 59–74.
Bell, F.G. 1994b. The Speeton Clay of North Yorkshire, England: an investigation of its geotechnical
properties. Engineering Geology,36, 259–266.
Bell, F.G. 1994c. A survey of the engineering properties of some anhydrite and gypsum from the north
and midlands of England. Engineering Geology,38, 1–23.
Bell, F.G. 1995. Cement stabilization of clay soils with examples. Environmental and Engineering
Geoscience,1, 139–151.
Bell, F.G. 1996a. Lime stabilization of clay minerals and soils. Engineering Geology, 42, 223–237.
Bell, F.G. 1996b. Dereliction: colliery spoil heaps and their rehabilitation. Environmental and Engineering
Geoscience,2, 85–96.
Bell, F.G. 2002. The geotechnical properties of some till deposits along the coastal areas of eastern
England. Engineering Geology, 63, 49–68.
Bell, F.G. and Cashman, P.M. 1986. Control of groundwater by groundwater lowering. In: Groundwater
in Engineering Geology, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 3, Cripps, J.C., Bell, F.G. and
Culshaw, M.G. (Eds.), The Geological Society, London, 471–486.
Bell, F.G. and Coulthard, J.M. 1990. Stone preservation with illustrative examples from the United
Kingdom. Journal of Environmental Geology and Water Science, 16, 75–81.
Bell, F.G. and Coulthard, J.M. 1997. A survey of some geotechnical properties of the Tees Laminated
Clay of central Middlesbrough, north east England. Engineering Geology, 48, 117–133.
Bell, F. G. and Culshaw, M. G. 1993. A survey of the geomechanical properties of some relatively weak
Triassic sandstones. In: The Engineering Geology of Weak Rock, Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 8, Cripps, J. C., Coulthard, J.M., Culshaw, M.G., Forster, A., Hencher, S.R. and Moon,
C.F. (Eds.), Geological Society, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 139–148.
Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. 1998. Petrographic and engineering properties of sandstone from the
Sneinton Formation, Nottinghamshire, England. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,31, 5–21.
Bell, F.G. and De Bruyn, I.A. 1998. Sensitive, expansive, dispersive and collapsible soils. Bulletin
International Association Engineering Geology, 56, 19–38.
Bell, F.G. and Fox, R.M. 1988. Ground treatment and foundations in discontinuous rock masses affected
by mining subsidence. The Mining Engineer, 148, 278–283.
Bell, F.G. and Genske, D.D. 2000. Restoration of derelict mining sites and mineral workings. Bulletin
Engineering Geology and the Environment, 59, 173–185.
Bell, F.G. and Haskins D.R. 1997. A geotechnical overview of the Katse Dam and Transfer Tunnel,
Lesotho, with a note on basalt durability. Engineering Geology, 46, 175–198.
Bell, F.G. and Jermy, C.A. 2000. The engineering character of some dolerites from Natal and
surrounding areas, South Africa. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 33,
59–76.
Bell, F.G. and Jermy, C.A. 2002. Permeability and fluid flow in stressed strata and mine stability, Eastern
Transvaal Coalfield, South Africa. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 35,
391–402.
Bell, F.G. and Kerr, A. 1993. Coal mining and water quality with illustrations from Britain. In: Environmental
Management, Geowater and Engineering Aspects, Chowdhury, R.N. and Sivakumar, S. (Eds.),
A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 607–614.
Bell, F.G. and Lindsay, P. 1998. Durability of shales of the Pietermaritzburg Formation, greater Durban
area, South Africa. Proceedings 8th Congress International Association of Engineering Geology,
Vancouver, Moore, D.P and Hungr, O. (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1, 275–282.
561
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Bell, F.G. and Lindsay, P. 1999. The petrographic and geomechanical properties of some sandstones
from the Newspaper Member of the Natal Group, near Durban, South Africa. Engineering Geology,52,
57–81.
Bell, F.G. and Mason, T.R. 1997. The problems of flooding in Ladysmith, Natal, South Africa.
In: Geohazards and Engineering Geology,Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 14, Eddleston,
M. and Maund, J.G. (Eds.), Geological Society, London, 3–10.
Bell, F.G. and Maud, R.R. 1994. Dispersive soils and earth dams: a South African view. Bulletin
Association Engineering Geologists,31, 433–446.
Bell, F.G. and Maud, R.R. 1995. Expansive clays and construction, especially of low-rise structures: a
viewpoint from Natal, South Africa. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,1, 41–59.
Bell, F.G. and Maud, R.R. 1996. Landslides associated with the Pietermaritzburg Formation in the
greater Durban area, South Africa. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,2, 557–573.
Bell, F.G. and Maud, R.R. 2000. A groundwater survey of the greater Durban area and environs, Natal,
South Africa. Environmental Geology, 39, 925–936.
Bell, F.G. and Mitchell, J.K. 1986. Control of groundwater by exclusion. In: Groundwater in Engineering
Geology, Engineering Geology Special Publication No 3, Cripps, J.C., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G.
(Eds.).The Geological Society, London, 429–443.
Bell, F.G. and Walker, D.J.H. 2000. A further examination of the nature of dispersive soils in Natal, South
Africa. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 33, 187–199.
Bell, F.G., Bell, A.W., Duane, M.J. and Hytiris, N. 1996. Contaminated land: the British position and some
case histories. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 2, 355–368.
Bell, F.G., Entwisle, D.C. and Culshaw, M.G. 1997. A geotechnical survey of some British Coal Measures
mudstones, with particular emphasis on durability. Engineering Geology,46, 115–129.
Bell, F.G., Culshaw, M.G. and Cripps, J.C. 1999. A review of selected engineering geological character-
istics of English chalk, Engineering Geology,54, 237–269.
Bell, F.G., Halbich, T.F.J. and Bullock, S.E.T. 2002. The effects of acid mine drainage from an old mine in the
Witbank Coalfield, South Africa. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 35, 265–278.
Bell, F.G., Sillito, A.J, and Jermy, C.A. 1996. Landfills and associated leachate in the greater Durban
area, two case histories. In: Engineering Geology of Waste Disposal, Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 11, Bentley, S.P. (Ed.), Geological Society, London, 15–35.
Bell, J.W., Amelung, F., Ramelli, A.R. and Blewitt, G. 2002. Land subsidence in Las Vegas, Nevada,
1935–2000: new geodetic data show evolution, revised spatial patterns, and reduced rates.
Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 8, 155–174.
Berry, P.L. and Poskitt, T.J. 1972. The consolidation of peat. Geotechnique, 22, 27–52.
Berry, P.L., Illsley, D. and Mackay, I.R. 1985. Settlement of two housing estates at St. Annes due to con-
solidation of a near surface peat stratum. Proceedings Institution Civil Engineers, Part 1, 77, 111–136.
Bieniawski, Z.T. 1974. Geomechanics classification of rock masses and its application to tunnelling.
Proceedings Third Congress International Society of Rock Mechanics, Denver, 1, 27–32.
Bieniawski, Z.T. 1989. Engineering Rock Mass Classifications. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Bishop, A.W. 1973. The stability of tips and spoil heaps. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 6,
335–376.
Blight, G.E. 1990. Construction in tropical soils. Proceedings Second International Conference on
Geomechanics in Tropical Soils, Singapore, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 2, 449–468.
Blight, G.E. 1994. The geotechnical behaviour of arid and semi-arid zone soils - South African experi-
ence. Proceedings First International Symposium on Engineering Characteristics of Arid Soils,
London, Fookes P.G. and Parry, R.H.G. (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 221–235.
Booth, B. 1979. Assessing volcanic risk. Journal of the Geological Society, 136, 331–340.
Bozovic, A., Budanur, H., Nonveiller, E. and Pavlin, B. 1981. The Keban Dam foundation on karstified
limestone – a case history. Bulletin International Association Engineering Geology, 24, 45–51.
Boyer, B.W. 1997. Sinkholes, soils, fractures and drainage: Interstate 70 near Frederick, Maryland.
Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 3, 469–485.
Brabb, E.E., Pampeyan, E.H. and Bonella, M.G. 1972. Landslide Susceptibility in San Mateo County,
California. United States Geolgical Survey, Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MP-360.
Bray, J.D., Sancio, R.B. and Durgunoglu, T. 2004. Subsurface characterization at ground failure sites in
Adapazari, Turkey. Proceedings American Society Civil Engineers, Journal of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Engineering, 130, 673–685.
562
References
Briggs, R.P. 1987. Engineering geology, seismic and volcanic hazards in the Hijaz Railway region –
Syria, Jordan and Saudi Arabia. Bulletin Association Engineering Geologists, 24, 403–423.
Broms, B.B. 1991. Stabilization of soil with lime columns. In: Foundation Engineering Handbook. Second
Edition, Fang, H.-Y. (Ed.), Chapman and Hall, New York, 833–855.
Brook, C.A. and Alison, T.L. 1986. Fracture mapping and ground subsidence susceptibility modelling in
covered karst terrain: the example of Dougherty County, Georgia. Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Land Subsidence, Venice. International Association of Hydrological
Sciences, Publication No. 151, 595–606.
Brown, S.F. 1996. Soil mechanics in pavement engineering. Geotechnique, 46, 383–426.
Brown, R.H., Konoplyanstev, A.A., Ineson, J. and Kovalevsky, V.S. (Eds.). 1972. Groundwater Studies:
An International Guide for Research and Practice.Studies and Reports in Hydrology, 7, UNESCO, Paris.
Brune, G. 1965. Anhydrite and gypsum problems in engineering geology. Bulletin Association
Engineering Geologists,3, 26–38.
Brunsden, D., Doornkamp, J.C., Fookes, P.G. and Jones, D.K.C. 1975. Large scale geomorphological
mapping and highway engineering design. Quarterly JournalEngineering Geology, 8, 227–253.
Bumkley, S.M., Rosen, P.A., Hensley, S. and Tapley, B.D. 2003. Land subsidence in Houston, Texas,
measured by radar interferometry and constrained by extensometers. Journal Geophysical Research
B, Solid Earth, 108, 1–13.
Bullock, S.E.T. and Bell, F.G. 1995. An investigation of surface and groundwater quality at a mine in the
north west Transvaal, South Africa. Transactions Institution Mining and Metallurgy, 104, Section A
Mining Industry, A125–A133.
Burland, J.B. 1990. On the compressibility and shear strength of natural clays. Geotechnique, 40,
339–378.
Burland, J.D. and Wroth, C.P. 1975. Settlement of buildings and associated damage. In: Settlement of
Structures, British Geotechnical Society, Pentech Press, London, 611–654.
Burnett, A.D. and Fookes, P.G. 1974. A regional engineering geological study of the London Clay in the
London and Hampshire Basins. Quarterly JournalEngineering Geology, 7, 257–296.
Burrough, P.A. 1986. Principles of Geographical Information Systems for Land Resource Analysis.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bussard, T., Tachere, L., Parriaux, A. and Maitre, V. 2006. Methodology for delineating protection areas
against persistent contaminants. Quarterly JournalEngineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 39, 97–109.
Butlin, R.N., Cooke, R.U., Jaynes, S.M. and Sharp, A.D. 1985. Research on limestone decay in the
United Kingdom. Proceedings Fifth International Congress on Deterioration and Conservation of
Stone, Lausanne, 536–546.
Buttrick, D.B., van Schalkwyk, A., Kleywegt, R.J. and Watermeyer, R.B. 2001. Proposed method for
dolomite land hazard and risk assessment in South Africa. Journal South African Institution Civil
Engineers, 43, 27–36.
Bye, A.R. and Bell, F.G. 2001. Stability assessment and slope design at Sandsloot open pit, South Africa.
International Journal Rock Mechanics and Mining Science, 38, 449–466.
Calembert. L. 1975. Engineering geological problems in karstic regions. Bulletin International Association
Engineering Geology, 12, 39–82.
Casagrande, A. 1932. Discussion on frost heaving. Proceedings Highway Research Board, Bulletin
No 12, Washington D.C., 169.
Casagrande, A. 1936. Characteristics of cohesionless soils affecting the stability of slopes and earth fills.
Journal Boston Society of Civil Engineers, 23, 3–32.
Casagrande, A. 1948. Classification and identification of soils. Transactions American Society of Civil
Engineers, 113, 901–992.
Casagrande, A. 1961. Control of seepage through foundations and abutment dams. Geotechnique, 11,
161–181.
Castro, D.J. and Bell, F.G. 1995. An engineering geological appraisal of the sandstones of the Clarens
Formation, Lesotho, in relation to tunnelling. Geotechnical and Geological Engineering,13, 117–142.
Chandler, J.H. 2001. Terrain measurement using automated digital photogrammetry. In: Land Surface
Evaluation for Engineering Practice, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 18, Griffiths, J.S.
(Ed.), Geological Society, London, 13–18.
Chandler, R.J. 1969. The effect of weathering on the shear strength properties of Keuper Marl.
Geotechnique, 19, 321–334.
563
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Chandler, R.J. and Tosatti, G. 1995. The Stava tailings dam failure, Italy, July 1985. Proceedings
Institution Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, 113, 67–79.
Charles, J.A. and Skinner, H.D. 2001. Compressibility of foundation fills. Proceedings Institution Civil
Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, 149, 145–157.
Charles, J.A., Burford, D. and Hughes, D.B. 1993. Settlement of opencast backfill at Horsley 1973-1992.
Proceedings Conference on Engineered Fills, Newcastle upon Tyne, Clarke, B.G., Jones, C.J.F.P. and
Moffatt, A.I.B. (Eds.), Telford Press, London, 429–440.
Charman, 1. M. 1988. Laterite in Road Pavements. Special Publication 47, Construction Industry
Research and Information Association (CIRIA), London.
Chilton, P.J., Lawrence, A.R, and Stuart, M.E. 1998. Pesticides in groundwater: some preliminary results
from recent research in temperate and tropical environments. In: Groundwater Contaminants and their
Migration, Special Publication No. 128, Mather, J., Banks, D., Dumpleton, S. and Fermor, M. (Eds.),
Geological Society, London, 333–345.
Chilton, P.J., Stuart, M.E., Gooddy, D.C., Williams, R.J. and Johnson, A.C. 2005. Pesticide fate and
behaviour in the UK Chalk aquifer, and implications for groundwater quality. Quarterly Journal of
Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 65–81.
Clarke, B.G. 1990. Consolidation characteristics of clays from self-boring pressuremeter tests. In: Field
Testing in Engineering Geology,Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 6, Bell, F.G., Culshaw,
M.G., Cripps, J.C. and Coffey, J.R. (Eds.), Geological Society, London, 33–37.
Clayton, K.M. 1990. Sea level rise and coastal defences in the United Kingdom. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology,23, 283–288.
Clayton, C.R.I., Matthews, M.C. and Simons, N.E. 1996. Site Investigation. Second Edition. Blackwell
Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
Clevenger, M.A. 1958. Experience with loess as a foundation material. Transactions American Society
of Civil Engineers, 123, 151–180.
Clough, G.W. 1981. Innovations in tunnel construction and support techniques. Bulletin Association of
Engineering Geologists, 18, 151–167.
Cooke, R.U., Goudie, A.S. and Doornkamp, J.C. 1978. Middle East – review and bibliography of
geomorphological contributions. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 11, 9–18.
Cooper, A.H. 1995. Subsidence hazards due to the dissolution of Permian gypsum in England: investi-
gation and remediation. In: Karst Geohazards,Beck, B.F. (Ed.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 23–29.
Cooper, A.H. and Saunders, J.M. 2002. Road and bridge construction across gypsum karst in England.
Engineering Geology, 65, 217–223.
Cooper, M.R. and Rose, A.N. 1999. Stone column support for an embankment on deep alluvial soils.
Proceedings Institution Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, 137, 15–25.
Corin, L., Couchard, B., Dethy, B., Halleux, L., Mojoie, A., Richter, T. and Wauters, J.P. 1997. Radar
tomography applied to foundation design in a karstic environment. In: Modern Geophysics in
Engineering Geology, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 12, McCann, D.M, Eddleston, M.,
Fenning, P.J. and Reeves, G.M. (Eds.), Geological Society, London, 167–173.
Coulthard, J.M. and Bell, F.G. 1993. The engineering geology of the Lower Lias Clay at Blockley,
Gloucestershire, U.K. Geotechnical and Geological Engineering, 11, 185–201.
Craft, D.C. and Acciardi, R.G. 1984. Failure of pore water analyses for dispersion. Proceedings American
Society Civil Engineers, Journal Geotechnical Engineering Division, 110, 459–472.
Cripps, J.C. and Taylor, R.K. 1981. The engineering properties of mudrocks. Quarterly Journal of
Engineering Geology, 14, 325–346.
Cripps, J.C., McCann, D.M., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. 1988. An assessment of geophysical meth-
ods for exploration of mine shafts. Proceedings International Conference on Mine Workings. 88,
Edinburgh, Engineering Technics Press, Edinburgh, 53–60.
Cripps, J.C., Deaves, A., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. 1989. The Don Valley intercepting sewer scheme: an
investigation of flow into underground workings. Bulletin Association of Engineering Geologists, 30, 409–425.
Culshaw, M.G. 2005. From concept towards reality: developing the attributed geological model of the
shallow subsurface. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 231–284.
Culshaw, M.G., Foster, A., Cripps, J.C. and Bell, F.G. 1990. Applied geology maps for land-use planning
in Great Britain. Proceedings Sixth Congress International Association of Engineering Geology,
Amsterdam, Price, D. (Ed.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1, 85–93.
564
References
Dalgic, S. 2002. A comparison of predicted and actual tunnel behaviour in the Istanbul Metro, Turkey.
Engineering Geology, 63, 69–82.
Darcy, H. 1856. Les Fontaines Publiques de la Ville de Dijon. Dalmont, Paris.
De Bruyn, I.A. and Bell, F.G. 1997. Mining induced seismicity in South Africa: an historical survey.
Proceedings International Symposium on Engineering Geology and the Environment, Athens, Marinos.
P.(Ed.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 3, 2321–2326.
De Bruyn, I.A. and Bell, F.G. 2001. The occurrence of sinkholes and subsidence depressions in the
Far West Rand and Gauteng Province, South Africa. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 6,
281–295.
Deere, D.U. 1964. Technical description of cores for engineering purposes. Rock Mechanics and
Engineering Geology, 1, 18–22.
De Graaf, P.J.H. and Bell, F.G. 1997. The Delivery Tunnel North, Lesotho Highlands Water Project.
Geotechnical and Geological Engineering, 15, 95–120.
De Sousa, S.P., Calijuri, M.L. and Meira, A.D. 1998. Reservoir silting up: the Manso System case his-
tory. Proceedings Eighth International Congress International Association of Engineering Geology
and the Environment, Vancouver, Moore, D. and Hungr, O. (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 5,
3291–3295.
Dobereiner, L. and de Freitas, M.H. 1986. Geotechnical properties of weak sandstones, Geotechnique,
36, 79–94.
Donath, F.A. 1964. Strength variation and deformational behaviour of anisotropic rocks. In: State of
Stress in the Earth’s Crust,Judd, W.R. (Ed.), Elsevier, New York, 281–298.
Donnelly, L.J. 2006. A review of coal mining induced fault reactivation in Great Britain. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 39, 5–50.
Doolin, D.M., Wells, D.l. and Williams, P.L. 2005. Assessment of fault-creep deformation at Memorial Stadium,
Universitry of California, Berkeley, California. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 11, 125–139.
Drumm, E.C. and Yang, M.Z. 2005. Preliminary screening of residual soils in karst terrain. Environmental
and Engineering Geoscience, 11, 29–42.
Dyke, C.G. and Dobereiner, L. 1991. Evaluating the strength and deformability of sandstones. Quarterly
Journal Engineering Geology,24, 123–134.
Edmunds, W.M. and Smedley, P.L. 1996. Groundwater geochemistry and health. In: Environmental
Geochemistry and Health with Special Reference to Developing Countries,Appleton, J.D., Fuge, R.
and McCall, G.J.H. (Eds.), Special Publication No. 113, Geological Society, London, 91–105.
Elliot, T., Chadha, D.S. and Younger, P.L. 2001. Water quality impacts and palaeohydrogeology in the
Yorkshire chalk aquifer, UK. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 34,
385–398.
Eriksson, L.G. 1989. Underground disposal of high-level radioactive waste in the United States of
America. Bulletin International Association of Engineering Geology, 39, 35–52.
Ewert, F.K. 2005. Grouting investigations. International Water Power and Dam Construction, 57, 22–26.
Erwin, J.W. and Brown, R.A. 1988. Karstic foundation problems Sunny Point Railroad. In: Geotechnical
Aspects of Karst Terrains: Exploration, Foundation Design and Performance, and Remedial Measures,
Geotechnical Special Publication No. 14, Sitar, N. (Ed.), American Society Civil Engineers, New York,
74–85.
Esper, P. and Tachibana, E. 1998. Lessons from the Kobe earthquake. In: Geohazards and Engineering
Geology, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 15, Maund, J.G. and Eddleston, M. (Eds),
Geological Society, London, 110–116.
Eyles, N. and Sladen, J.A. 1981. Stratigraphy and geotechnical properties of weathered lodgement till in
Northumberland, England. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 14, 129–142.
Feda, J. 1966. Structural stability of subsident loess from Praha-Dejvice. Engineering Geology, 1, 201–219.
Finno, R.J., Voss Jr, F.T., Rossow, E. and Blackburn, J.T. 2005. Evaluating damage potential in build-
ings affected by excavations. Proceedings American Society Civil Engineers, Journal of Geotechnical
and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 131, 1199–1210.
Folk, R.L. 1973. Carbonate petrology in the post-Sorbian age. In: Evolving Concepts in Sedimentology,
Ginsberg, R.N. (Ed.), John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Fookes, P.G. 1997. Geology for engineers: the geological model, prediction and performance. Quarterly
Journal Engineering Geology, 30, 293–424.
565
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Fookes, P.G. and Best, R. 1969. Consolidation characteristics of some late Pleistocene periglacial
metastable soils of east Kent. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,2, 103–128.
Fookes, P.G. and Hawkins, A.B. 1988. Limestone weathering: its engineering significance and a
proposed classification scheme. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,21, 7–31.
Fookes, P.G. and Poole, A.B. 1981. Some preliminary considerations on the selection and durability of
rock and concrete materials for breakwaters and coastal protection works. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology, 14, 97–128.
Foster, S.S.D. 2000. Assessing and controlling the impacts of agriculture on groundwater – from barley
barons to beef bans. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 33, 263–280.
Forster, A., Hobbs, P.R.N., Cripps, A.C., Entwirtle, D.C., Fenwick, S.M.M., Raines, M.R., Hallam, J.R.,
Jones, D.L., Self, S.J. and Meakin, J.L. 1994. Engineering Geology of British Rocks and Soils: Gault
Clay. Technical Report. WN/94/31, British Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham.
Forster, A., Lawrence, D.J.D., Highley, D.E., Cheney, C.S. and Arrick, A. 2004. Applied geological
mapping for planning and development: an example from Wigan, UK. Quarterly Journal Engineering
Geology and Hydrogeology, 37, 301–315.
Forth, R.A. 2004. Groundwater and geotechnical aspects of deep excavations in Hong Kong.
Engineering Geology, 72, 253–260.
Fourie, A.B., Blight, G.E. and Papageorgiou, G. 2001. Static liquefaction as a possible explanation for
the Merriespruit tailings dam failure. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 38, 707–719.
Franklin, J.L. and Broch, E. 1972. The point load test. International Journal Rock Mechanics and Mining
Science, 9, 669–697.
French, P.W. 2001. Coastal Defences: Processes, Problems and Solutions. Routledge, London.
Geertsema, M. and Torrance, J.K. 2005. Quick clay from the Mink Creek landslide near Terrace, British
Columbia: geotechnical properties, mineralogy and geochemistry. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 42,
907–918.
Gerber, A. and Harmse, H.J. von M. 1987. Proposed procedure for identification of dispersive soils by
chemical testing. The Civil Engineer in South Africa, 29, 397–399.
Gercek, H. and Genis, M. 1999. Effect of anisotropic in situstresses on the stability of underground open-
ings. Proceedings Ninth International Congress on Rock Mechanics, Paris, 1, 367–370.
Gillott, J.E. and Swenson, E.G. 1969. Mechanism of alkali carbonate reaction. Quarterly Journal of
Engineering Geology, 2, 7–24.
Gogte, B.S. 1973. An evaluation of some common Indian rocks with special reference to alkali aggregate
reactions. Engineering Geology, 7, 135–154.
Gray, D.A., Mather, J.D. and Harrison, I.B. 1974. Review of groundwater pollution for waste sites in
England and Wales with provisional guidelines for future site selection. Quarterly Journal of
Engineering Geology, 7, 181–196.
Green, R.G. and Hawkins, A.B. 2005. Rock cut on the A5 at Bends, North Wales, UK. Bulletin
Engineering Geology and the Environment, 64, 95–109.
Griffiths, J.S. 2005. Landslides. In: Geomorphology for Engineers, Fookes, P.G., Lee, M.E. and Milligan,
G. (Eds.), Whittles Publishing, Dunbeath, Caithness, 173–217.
Grim, R.E. 1952. Applied Clay Mineralogy. McGraw Hill, New York.
Grose, B. and Benton, L. 2005. Hull wastewater flow transfer tunnel: tunnel collapse and causation inves-
tigation. Proceedings Institution Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, 158, 179–185.
Hack, H.R.G.K., Price, D.G. and Rengers, N. 2003. A new approach to rock slope stability – a probabil-
ity classification (SSPC). Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment, 62, 167–184.
Hammersley, G.P. 1989. The use of petrography in the evaluation of aggregates. Concrete, 23, No 10, 20–24.
Hansmire, W.H. 1981. Tunneling and excavation in soft rock and soil. Bulletin Association of Engineering
Geologists, 17, 77–89.
Harker, A. 1939. Metamorphism. Methuen, London.
Haskins, D.R. and Bell, F.G. 1995. Drakensberg basalts: their alteration, breakdown and durability.
Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,28, 287–302.
Haskins, D.R., Bell, F.G. and Schall, A. 1998. The evaluation of granite saprolite as a founding material at
Injaka Dam, Mpumalanga, South Africa. Proceedings Eighth International Congress International
Association Engineering Geology,Moore, D.P. and Hungr, (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1, 461–468.
Hawkins, A.B. 1986. Rock descriptions. In Site Investigation Practice: Assessing BS 5930, Engineering
Geology Special Publication No 2, Hawkins, A.B. (Ed.), The Geological Society, London, 59–66.
566
References
Hawkins, A.B. and McConnell, B.J. 1992. Sensitivity of sandstone strength and deformability to changes
in moisture content. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,25, 115–129.
Hearn, G.J. 2002. Engineering geomorphology for road design in unstable mountainous areas: lessons
learnt after 25 years in Nepal. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 35, 143–154.
Herbert, S.M., Roche, D.P. and Card, G.B. 1987. The value of engineering geological desk study
appraisals in scheme planning. In Planning in Engineering Geology, Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 4,Culshaw, M.G., Bell, F.G., Cripps, J.C. and O’Hara, M. (Eds.), Geological Society,
London, 151–154.
Hibbs, B.J. and Boghici, R. 1999. On the Rio Grande aquifer: flow relationships, salinization, and envi-
ronmental problems from El Paso to Fort Quitman, Texas. Environmental and Engineering
Geoscience, 5, 51–59.
Hiscock, K.M., Lovett, A.A., Brainard, J.S. and Parfitt, J.P. 1995. Groundwater vulnerability assessment:
two case studies using GIS methodology. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology, 28, 179–194.
Hobbs, N.B. 1986. Mire morphology and the properties and behaviour of some British and foreign peats.
Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 19, 7–80.
Hoek, E. and Bray, J.W. 1981. Rock Slope Engineering. Third Edition, Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy, London.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E.T. 1980. Underground Excavations in Rock. Institution of Mining and Metallurgy,
London.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E.T. 1997. Practical estimates of rock mass strength. International Journal Rock
Mechanics Mining Science,34, 1165–1186.
Hoek, E., Kaiser, P.K. and Bawden, W.F. 1995. Support of Underground Excavations in Hard Rock.
A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Holzer, T.L., Davis, S.N. and Lofgren, B.E. 1979. Faulting caused by groundwater extraction in south
central Arizona. Journal Geophysical Research, 84, 603–612.
Houlsby, A.C. 1990. Construction and Design of Cement Grouting. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Hsu, S.-C. and Nelson, P.P. 1993. Characterization of Cretaceous clay shales in North America.
Proceedings International Symposium on Geotechnical Engineering of Hard Soils-Soft Rocks,Athens,
Anagnostopoulos, A., Schlosser, F., Kalteziotis, N. and Frank, R. (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1,
139–146.
Hudson-Edwards, K.A., Macklin, M.G. and Jamieson, H.E. 2003. The impact of tailings dam spills and
clean-up operations on sediment and water quality in river systems: the Ros Agrio-Guadiamar,
Aznalcollar, Spain. Applied Geochemistry, 18, 221–239.
Hughes, D.B. and Clarke, B.G. 2003. Surface coal mining and the reclamation of tips, landfills and
quarries – some geotechnical case studies from northern England. International Journal Surface
Mining, Reclamation and Environment. 17, 67–97.
Hughes, D.B., Clarke, B.G. and Money, M.S. 1998. The glacial succession in lowland northern England.
Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,31, 211–224.
Hunsche, U. and Hampel, A. 1999. Rock salt – the mechanical properties of the host material for a
radioactive waste repository. Engineering Geology, 52, 271–291.
Hutchinson, J.N. 1973. The response of the London Clay cliffs to differing rates of toe erosion. Geologicia
Applicata e Idrogeologia,8, 221–239.
Hutchinson, J.N. 1992. Landslide hazard assessment. Proceedings Sixth International Symposium on
Landslides,Christchurch, Bell, D.H. (Ed.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 3, 1805–1841.
Hutchinson, J.N., Bromhead, E.N. and Chandler, M.P. 1991. Investigation of coastal landslides at
St. Catherine’s Point, Isle of Wight. Proceedings International Conference on Slope Stability
Engineering: Applications and Developments,Isle of Wight, Thomas Telford Press, London, 151–161.
Hvorslev, M.J. 1949. Subsurface Exploration and Sampling of Soils for Civil Engineering Purposes.
American Society of Civil Engineers Report, Waterways Experimental Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Iliev, I.G. 1967. An attempt to estimate the degree of weathering of intrusive rocks from their physico-
mechanical properties. Proceedings First Congress International Society of Rock Mechanics, Lisbon,
1, 109–114.
Ineson, J. 1962. A hydrogeological study of the permeability of chalk. Journal Institution Water
Engineers,16, 255–286.
Ingham, J.P. 2005. Predicting the frost resistance of building stone. Quarterly Journal Engineering
Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 387–399.
567
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Irfan, T.Y. and Dearman, W.R. 1978. The engineering petrography of a weathered granite in Cornwall,
England. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 11, 233–244.
Jackson, P.D. and McCann, 1997. Cross-hole seismic tomography for engineering site investigation.
In: Modern Geophysics in Engineering Geology, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 12,
McCann, D.M., Eddleston, M., Fenning, P.J. and Reeves, G.M. (Eds.), Geological Society, London,
247–264.
James, A.N. and Little, A.L. 1994. Geotechnical aspects of sabkha at Jubail, Saudi Arabia. Quarterly
Journal Engineering Geology,27, 83–121.
James, A.N. and Kirkpatrick, I.M. 1980. Design of foundations of dams containing soluble rocks and
soils. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology, 13, 189–198.
James, P.M. 1993. Engineering problems associated with some unusual weathered processes in lime-
stones. In: Engineering Geology, Hydrogeology and Environmental Geology, Second Series, McNally,
G., Knight, M. and Smith, R. (Eds), Environmental, Engineering and Hydrogeology Specialist Group,
Geological Society Australia, Butterfly Books, Springwood, New South Wales, 58–62.
Jammal, S.E. 1986. The Winter Park sinkhole and Central Florida sinkhole type subsidence.
Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Land Subsidence, Venice. International
Association of Hydrological Sciences, Publication No 151, 585–594.
Jarvis, A., England, A. and Mee, S. 2003. Mine water treatment at Six Bells Colliery, South Wales: prob-
lems and solutions, from conception to completion. Land Contamination and Reclamation, 11,
153–160.
Jayawardena, U de S. and Izawa, E. 1994. A new chemical index of weathering for metamorphic silicate
rocks in tropical regions: a study from Sri Lanka. Engineering Geology,36, 303–310.
Jeng, F.S., Weng, M.C., Lin, M.L. and Huang, T.H. 2004. Influence of petrographic parameters on geo-
technical properties of tertiary sandstones from Taiwan. Engineering Geology, 73, 71–91.
Jermy, C.A. and Bell, F.G. 1991. Coal bearing strata and the stability of coal mines in South Africa.
Proceeding Seventh International Congress on Rock Mechanics, International Society Rock
Mechanics, Wittke, W. (Ed.), Aachen, 2, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1125–1131.
Jones, D.K., Cooke, R.U. and Warren, A. 1986. Geomorphological investigation, for engineering pur-
poses of blowing sand and dust hazard. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,19, 251–270.
Kannan, C.R. 2003. Combined use of grouting and soil stabilization in sinkhole remediation. Proceedings
NinthMulti-disciplinary Conference on Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of
Karst, Huntsville, Alabama, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 122, Beck, B.F. (Ed.), American
Society Civil Engineers, Reston, Virginia, 635–643.
Kennard, M.F. and Knill, J.L. 1968. Reservoirs on limestone, with particular reference to the Cow Green
Scheme. Journal Institution Water Engineers, 23, 87–113.
Keefer, D.K. 1984. Landslides caused by earthquakes. Bulletin American Geological Society, 95,
406–421.
Kenny, R. 1990. Hydrogeomorphic flood hazard evaluation for semi-arid environments. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology, 23, 333–336.
Kentli, B. and Topal, T. 2004. Evaluation of rock excavatability and slope stability along a segment of
motorway. Environmental Geology, 46, 83–95.
Kim, S. and Park, H. 2003. The relationship between physical and chemical weathering indices of gran-
ites around Seoul, Korea. Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment, 62, 207–212.
Kennedy, A. 2001. Drilling and grouting for dam construction in southern Turkey. Geodrilling
International, 9, No. 3, 1–16.
Kerr, R.C. and Nigra, J.O. 1952. Eolian sand control. Bulletin American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, 36, 1541–1573.
Kezdi, A. and Rethati. L. 1988. Handbook of Soil Mechanics, Volume 3: Soil Mechanics of Earthworks,
Foundations and Highway Engineering. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Khazai, B. and Sitar, N. 2004. Evaluation of factors controlling earthquake-induced landslides caused by
Chi Chi earthquake and comparison with the Northridge and Loma Prieta events. Engineering
Geology, 71, 79–95.
Kirsten, H.A.D. 1988. Case histories of groundmass characterization for excavatability. Proceedings
Symposium on Rock Classification for Engineering Purposes, American Society for Testing Materials,
Special Technical Publication 984, 102–120.
568
References
Kitchener, J. N. and Ellison, S.J. 1997. Second Severn crossing – design and construction of the
foundations. Proceedings Institution Civil Engineers, Civil Engineering Supplement, Special Issue 2, 120,
22–34.
Knill, J.L. 1971. Assessment of reservoir feasibility. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology, 4, 355–372.
Ko Ko, C., Flentje, P. and Chowdhury, R.N. 2003. Quantitative landslide hazard and risk assessment: a
case study. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 36, 261–272.
Kubo, K. and Katayama, T. 1978. Earthquake resistant properties and design of public utilities. In: The
Assessment and Mitigation of Earthquake Risk, UNESCO, Paris, 171–184.
Kumar, B.R. and Sharma, R.S. 2004. Effect of fly ash on engineering properties of expansive soils.
Proceedings American Society Civil Engineers, Journal of Geotechnical Engineering and
Geoenvironmental Engineering, 130, 764–767.
Kusznir, N.J., Ashwin, D.P. and Bradley, A.G. 1980. Seismicity in the north Staffordshire coalfield,
England. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences and Geomechanical
Abstracts, 17, 45–55.
Kutzner, C. 1996. Grouting of Rock and Soil. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Landva, A.O. and Pheeney, P. E. 1980. Peat fabric and structure. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 17,
416–435.
Langer, M. and Heusemann, S. 2001. Geomechanical stability and integrity of waste disposal in salt
structures. Engineering Geology, 61, 155–161.
Latham, J.-P. 1998. Assessment and specification of armourstone quality: from CIRIA/CUR (1991) to
CEN (2000). In: Advances in Aggregates and Armourstone Evaluation. Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 13. Latham, J.P. (Ed.), Geological Society, London, 65–85.
Latham, J.-P., Van Meulen, J. and Dupray, S. 2006. The specification of armourstone gradings and
EN 13383 (2002). Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 39, 51–64.
Lauffer, M. 1958. Gebirgsklassifizierung fur den stollenhua. Geologie und Bauwesen, 24, 46–51.
Leary, E. 1986. The Building Sandstones of the British Isles.Building Research Establishment, Watford,
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.
Lee, E.M. 2005. Coastal cliff recession risk: a simple judgement-based model. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 89–104.
Legget, R.F. 1987. The value of geology in planning. In: Planning and Engineering Geology, Engineering
Geology Special Publication No. 4, Culshaw, M.G., Bell, F.G., Cripps, J.C. and O’Hara, M. (Eds.),
Geological Society, London, 53–58.
Lin, Z.G. and Wang, S. J. 1988. Collapsibility and deformation characteristics of deep-seated loess in
China. Engineering Geology,25, 271–282.
Loehr, R.C. and Haikola, B.M. 2003. Long-term landfill primary and secondary leachate production.
Proceedings American Society Civil Engineers, Journal Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental
Engineering, 129, 1063–1067.
Lord, J.A., Twine, D. and Yeow, H. 1994. Foundations in Chalk. Project Report 11, Construction Industry
Research and Information Association (CIRIA), London.
Lugeon, M. 1933. Barrage et Geologie. Dunod, Paris.
Lutenegger, A.J. and Hallberg, G.R. 1988. Stability of loess. Engineering Geology, 25, 247–261.
Mackay, D.M. 1998. Is clean-up of VOC-contaminated groundwater feasible? In: Contaminated Land and
Groundwater – Future Directions,Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 13, Lerner, D.N. and
Walton, N. (Eds.), Geological Society, London, 3–11.
Maerz, N.H., Youssef, A. and Fennessey, T.W. 2005. New risk-consequence rockfall hazard rating
system for Missouri highways using digital image analysis. Environmental and Engineering
Geoscience, 11, 229–249.
Marsh, A.H. and Greenwood, N.R. 1995. Foundations in Gault Clay. Engineering Geology and
Construction, Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 10, Eddleston, M., Walthall, S., Cripps,
J.C. and Culshaw, M.G. (Eds.), Geological Society, London, 143–160.
Martinez, M.J., Espejo, R.A., Bilbao, I.A. and Cabrera, M.D. del R. 1990. Analysis of sedimentary
processes on the Las Canteras beach (Las Palmas, Spain) for its planning and management.
Engineering Geology,29, 377–386.
Matthews, M.C. and Clayton, C.R.I. 2004. Large diameter plate tests on weathered in situ chalk.
Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 37, 61–72.
569
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
McCann, D.M., Culshaw, M.G. and Fenning, P.J. 1997. Setting the standard for geophysical surveys in
site investigation. In: Modern Geophysics in Engineering Geology, Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 12, McCann, D.M., Eddleston, M., Fenning, P.J. and Reeves, G.M. (Eds.), Geological
Society, London, 3–34.
McDonald, R.J., Russill, N.R.W., Miliorizosis, M. and Thomas, J.W. 1998. A geophysical investigation of
saline intrusion and geological structure beneath areas of tidal coastal wetland at Langstone Habour,
Hampshire, UK. In: Groundwater Pollution, Aquifer Recharge and Vulnerability, Special Publication
No.130, Robins, N.S. (Ed.), Geological Society, London, 77–94.
McDowell, P.W., Barker, R.D., Butcher, A.P., Culshaw, M.G., Jackson, P.D., McCann, D.M., Skipp, B.O.,
Matthews, S.L. and Arthur, J.C.R. 2002. Geophysics in Engineering Investigations. Construction
Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), Report C592, Engineering Geology Special
Publication No. 19, Geological Society, London.
McGown, A. and Derbyshire, E. 1977. Genetic influences on the properties of tills. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology,10, 389–410.
MacGregor, F., Fell R., Mostyn, G.R., Hocking, G. and McNally, G. 1994. The estimation of rock
rippability. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology, 27, 123–144.
Meisina, C. 2004. Swelling-shrinking properties of weathered clayey soils associated with shallow
landslides. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 37, 77–94.
Mejía-Navarro, M. and Garcia, L.A. 1996. Natural hazard and risk assessment using decision support
systems, application: Glenwood Springs, Colorado. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 2,
299–324.
Milanovic, P.T. 2003. Prevention and remediation in karst engineering. Proceedings NinthMulti-discipli-
nary Conference on Sinkholes and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst, Huntsville,
Alabama, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 122, Beck, B.F. (Ed.), American Society Civil
Engineers, Reston, Virginia, 3–28.
Mitchell, J.K. 1986. Hazardous waste containment. In: Groundwater in Engineering Geology,
Engineering Geology Special Publication No. 3, Cripps, J.C., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. (Eds.),
The Geological Society, London, 145–157.
Morgenstern, N.R. 1995. The role of analysis in the evaluation of slope failure. Proceedings Sixth
International Symposium on Landslides, Christchurch, Bell, D.H. (Ed.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 3,
1615–1645.
Moye, D.G. 1955. Engineering geology for the Snowy Mountain scheme. Journal Institution of Engineers
of Australia, 27, 287–298.
Neal, J.T. 1995. Supai salt karst features: Holbrook Basin, Arizona. In: Karst Geohazards, Beck, B.F. (Ed.),
A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 53–59.
Netterberg, F. 1994. Engineering geology of pedocretes and other residual soils. Proceedings Seventh
Congress International Association Engineering Geology, Lisbon, Oliviera, R., Rodriques, L.F.,
Coelho,A.G.and Cunha, A.P. (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 5, XIX–XXXVIII.
Nichol, D. and Farmer, I.W. 1998. Settlement over peat on the A5 at Pant Dedwydd near
Cerrigydrundion, North Wales. Engineering Geology, 50, 299–307.
Nichol, D. and Wilson, S.A. 2002. Foundation geology of the River Dee estuary cable-stayed bridge,
Flintshire, North Wales. Engineering Geology, 63, 131–139.
Norris, G., Gahir, Z. and Siddharthan, R. 1998. An effective stress understanding of liquefaction
behaviour. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,4, 93–101.
Northmore. K.L., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. 1996. The engineering properties and behaviour of the
brickearth of south Essex. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,29, 147–161.
Northmore, K.J., Bell, F.G. and Culshaw, M.G. 1999. The engineering geology of the Claygate Beds and
the Bagshot Beds of south Essex. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,32, 215–231.
Obika, B., Freer-Hewish, R.J. and Fookes, P.G. 1989. Soluble salt damage to bituminous road and
runway surfaces. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,22, 59–73.
Olivier, H.G. 1979. A new engineering-geological rock durability classification. Engineering Geology, 14,
255–279.
Olivier, M., Bell, F.G. and Jermy, C.A. 1994. The effect of rainfall on slope failures with examples from
the greater Durban area. Proceedings Seventh Congress International Association Engineering
Geology, Lisbon, Balkema, Rotterdam, 3, 1629–1636.
570
References
Olson, R.E. 1998. Settlements of embankments on soft clays. Proceedings American Society Civil
Engineers, Journal Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 124, 278–288.
O’Riordan, N. 2003. Channel Tunnel Rail Link section 1: ground engineering. Proceedings Institution
Civil Engineers, Civil Engineering, 156(Special) 28–31.
Oweis, I.S. and Khera, R.P. 1990. Geotechnology of Waste Management, Butterworths, London.
Papadopolos, Z., Kolaiti, L. and Mourtzas, N. 1994. The effect of crystal size on the geotechnical
properties of Neogene gypsum in Crete. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,27, 267–273.
Peck, R.B. 1969. Deep excavation and tunnelling in soft ground: state-of-the-art-volume. Proceedings
Seventh International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Mexico City, 3,
225–290.
Perry, J., Field, M., Davidson, W. and Thompson, D. 2000. The benefits from geotechnics in construc-
tion of the A34 Newbury Bypass. Proceedings Institution Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering,
143, 83–92.
Petersen, K.W., Meyers, J.R. and Mackay, R.R. 2003. Sinkhole remediation measures for a highway
in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania. Proceedings Ninth Multi-disciplinary Conference on Sinkholes
and the Engineering and Environmental Impacts of Karst, Huntsville, Alabama, Geotechnical
Special Publication No. 122, Beck, B.F. (Ed.), American Society Civil Engineers, Reston, Virginia,
569–579.
Pettijohn, F.J. 1975. Sedimentary Rocks. Harper and Row, New York.
Pettijohn, F.J., Potter, P.E. and Siever, R. 1972. Sands and Sandstones, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Price, M. 1987. Fluid flow in the Chalk of England. In: Fluid Flow in Sedimentary Basins and Aquifers,
Special Publication No. 34, Goff, J.C. and Williams, B.P.J. (Eds), Geological Society, London,
141–156.
Price, M., Bird, M.J. and Foster, S.S.D. 1976. Chalk pore size measurements and their significance.
Water Services,80, 596–600.
Price, N.L. 1966. Fault and Joint Development in Brittle and Semi-Brittle Rock. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Priest, S.D. 1993. Discontinuity Analysis for Rock Engineering.Chapman and Hall, London.
Rahardjo, H., Aung, K.K., Leong, E.C. and Rezaur, R.B. 2004. Characteristics of residual soils in
Singapore as formed by weathering. Engineering Geology, 73, 157–169.
Rahn, P.H. and Davis, A.D. 1996. Gypsum foundation problems in the Black Hills area, South Dakota.
Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,2, 213–223.
Reynolds, J.M. 1992. The identification and mitigation of glacier related hazards: examples from the
Cordillera Blanca, Peru. In: Geohazards, Natural and Man-made, McCall, G.J.H., Laming, DJ.C. and
Scott, S.C. (Eds.), Chapman and Hall, London, 143–157.
Riemer, W. 1995. Landslides and reservoirs. Proceedings Sixth International Symposium on Landslides,
Christchurch, Bell, D.H. (Ed.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 3, 1973–2004.
Robinson, D.M. 1995. Concrete corrosion and slab heaving in a sabkha environment: Long Beach –
Newport Beach, California. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,1, 35–40.
Rosser, N.J., Petley, D.N., Lim, M., Dunning, S.A. and Allison, R.J. 2005. Terrestrial laser scanning for
monitoring the process of hard rock coastal cliff erosion. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and
Hydrogeology, 38, 363–375.
Sabins, F.F. 1996. Remote Sensing – Principles and Interpretation,W. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
Schuster, R.L. 1992. Recent advances in slope stabilization. Proceedings Sixth International Symposium
on Landslides,Christchurch, Bell, D.H. (Ed.), Balkema, Rotterdam, 3, 1715–1745.
Schultz, R.A. 1995. Limits on strength and deformation properties of jointed basaltic rock masses. Rock
Mechanics and Rock Engineering,28, 1–15.
Semenza, E. and Ghirotti, M. 2000. History of the 1963 Vaiont slide: the importance of geological
factors. Bulletin Engineering Geology and the Environment, 59, 87–97.
Serafim, J.L. 1968. Influence of interstitial water on rock masses. In: Rock Mechanics in Engineering
Practice, Stagg, K.G. and Zienkiewicz, O.C. (Eds.), Wiley, London, 55–77.
Shakoor, A. and Bonelli, R.E. 1991. Relationship between petrographic characteristics, engineering
index properties and mechanical properties of selected sandstones. Bulletin Association Engineering
Geologists,28, 55–71.
Sherard, J.L., Cluff, L.S. and Allen, L.R. 1974. Potentially active faults and dam foundations.
Geotechnique, 24, 367–429.
571
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Sherard, J.L., Dunnigan, L.P. and Decker R.S. 1976. Identification and nature of dispersive soils.
Proceedings American Society Civil Engineers, Journal Geotechnical Engineering Division, 102, 287–301.
Shrock, R.R. 1948. Sequence in Layered Rocks. McGraw Hill, New York.
Silgram, M., Williams, A., Waring, R., Neumann, I., Hughes, A., Mansour, M. and Besian, T. 2005.
Effectiveness of Nitrate Sensitive Areas Scheme in reducing groundwater concentrations in England.
Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 117–127.
Sills, G.C. and Hird, C.C. 2005. Coefficient of consolidation from piezocone measurements.
Geotechnique, 55, 597–602.
Sims, I. 1991. Quality and durability of stone for construction. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology,
24, 67–74.
Skempton, A.W. 1951. The bearing capacity of clays. Building Research Congress, Watford,
Hertfordshire, Division 1, 180–189.
Skempton, A.W. 1953. The colloidal activity of clays. Proceedings Third International Conference on Soil
Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Zurich, 1, 57–61.
Skempton, A.W. 1964. Long-term stability of clay slopes. Geotechnique, 14, 77–101.
Skempton, A.W. and Northey, R.D. 1952. The sensitivity of clays. Geotechnique, 30, 30–53.
Skempton, A.W., Schuster, R.L. and Petley, D.J. 1969. Joints and fissures in the London Clay at
Wraysbury and Edgware. Geotechnique, 19, 205–217.
Skinner, W.J. 1959. Experiments on the compressive strength of anhydrite. The Engineer,(February),
255-259; 288–292.
Sladen, J.A. and Wrigley, W. 1983. Geotechnical properties of lodgement till – a review. In: Glacial
Geology: An Introduction for Engineers and Earth Scientists, Eyles, N. (Ed.), Pergamon Press, Oxford,
184–212.
Smith, A. and Ellison, R.A. 1999. Applied geological maps for planning and development: a review of
examples from England and Wales, 1983 to 1996. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology, 32
(Supplement), S1–S44.
Smith, M.R. (Ed.). 1999. Stone: Building Stone, Rock Fill and Armourstone in Construction. Engineering
Geology Special Publication No. 16. Geological Society, London.
Snethen, D.R., Johnson, L.D. and Patrick, D.M. 1977. An Evaluation of Expedient Methodology for
Identification of Potentially Expansive Soils. Report No. FHWA–RD-77–94, United States Army
Engineers Waterways Experimental Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Soderberg, A.D. 1979. Expect the unexpected: foundations for dams in karst. Bulletin Association
Engineering Geologists, 16, 409–427.
Soloviev, S.L. 1978. Tsunamis. In: The Assessment and Mitigation of Earthquake Risk,UNESCO Press,
Paris, 91–143.
Soule, J.M. 1980. Engineering geologic mapping and potential geologic hazards in Colorado. Bulletin
International Association of Engineering Geology, 21, 121–131.
Sowers, G.F. 1996. Building on Sinkholes: Design and Construction of Foundations in Karst Terrain.
American Society Civil Engineers Press, New York.
Sridharan, A. and Allam, M.M. 1982. Volume change behaviour of desiccated soils. Proceedings
American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal Geotechnical Engineering Division, 108, GT8, 1057–1071.
Stacey, T.R. and Bell, F.G. 1999. The influence of subsidence on planning and development in
Johannesburg, South Africa. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience, 5, 373–388.
Stacey, T.R. and Page, C.H. 1986. Practical Handbook for Underground Rock Mechanics. Trans Tech
Publications, Clausthal-Zellerfeld.
Star, J. and Estes, J. 1990. Geographical Information Systems.Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Stipho, A.S. 1992. Aeolian sand hazards and engineering design for desert regions. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology,25, 83–92.
Styles, P. and Thomas, E. 2001. The use of microgravity for the characterization of karstic cavities on
Grand Bahama, Bahamas. In: Geotechnical and Environmental Applications of Karst Geology and
Hydrology, Beck, B.F. and Herring, J.G. (Eds.), A.A. Balkema, Lisse.
Styles, P., McGrath, R., Thomas, E. and Cassidy, N.J. 2005. The use of microgravity for cavity charac-
terization in karstic terrains. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 155–169.
Swart, C.J.U., Stoch, E.J., Van Jaarsveld, C.F. and Brink, A.B.A. 2003. The Lower Wonderfontein Spruit:
an expose. Environmental Geology, 43, 635–653.
572
References
Tang, M. and Shang, J.Q. 2000. Vacuum preloading consolidation of Yaoqiang Airport runway.
Geotechnique, 50, 613–623.
Taylor, R.K. 1988. Coal Measures mudrocks: composition, classification and weathering processes.
Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology, 21, 85–100.
Tate, E.L. and Farquharson, F.A.K. 2000. Simulating reservoir management under the threat of sedimen-
tation: the case of the Tarbela Dam on the River Indus. Water Resources Management, 14, 191–208.
Terzaghi, K. 1946. Introduction to tunnel geology. In: Rock Tunneling with Steel Supports, Proctor, R.
and White, T. (Eds.), Commercial Stamping and Shearing Company, Youngstown, Ohio, 17–99.
Terzaghi, K. 1950a. The mechanisms of landslides. In: Applications of Geology to Engineering Practice,
Paige, S. (Ed.), Berkey Volume, Memoir Geological Society of America, 83–124.
Terzaghi, K. 1950b. Geological aspects of soft ground tunnelling. In: Applied Sedimentation, Trask, P.D. (Ed.),
Wiley, New York , 193–209.
Terzaghi, K. 1962. Stability of steep slopes on hard unweathered rock. Geotechnique, 12, 251–270.
Terzaghi, K. and Peck, R.B. 1968. Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice. Second Edition. Wiley,
New York.
Thorne, C.R., Abt, S.R., Barends, F.B.J., Maynord, S.T. and Pilarczyk, K.W. 1995. Coastal and Shoreline
Portection. Wiley, Chichester.
Tomlinson, M.J. 2001. Foundation Design and Construction. Seventh Edition, Prentice Hall, Harlow,
England.
Trudgill, S.T. and Viles, H.A. 1998. Field and laboratory approaches to limestone weathering. Quarterly
Journal Engineering Geology, 31, 333–341.
Tsiambaos, G. and Sabatakakis, N. 2004. Considerations on strength of intact sedimentary rocks.
Engineering Geology, 72, 261–273.
Tugrul, A. and Gürpinar, O. 1997. The effect of chemical weathering on the engineering properties of
Eocene basalts in north eastern Turkey. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,3, 225–234.
Turkmen, S., Ozguler, E., Taga, H. and Karaogullarindam, T. 2002. Seepage problems in the karstic
limestone foundation of the Kalecik Dam (south Turkey). Engineering Geology, 63, 247–257.
Ulusay, R., Turrell, K. and Ider, M.H. 1994. Prediction of engineering properties of a selected litharenite
sandstone from its petrographic characteristics using correlation and multi-variate statistical tech-
niques. Engineering Geology,38, 135–157.
Vandwater, C.J., Dunne, W.M., Mauldon, M., Drumm, E.C. and Bateman, V. 2005. Classifying and
assessing the geologic contribution to rockfall hazard. Environmental and Engineering Geoscience,
11, 141–154.
Van Westen, C.J., Rengers, N. and Soeters, R. 2003. Use of geomorphological information in indirect
landslide susceptibility assessment. Natural Hazards, 30, 399–419.
Varnes, D.J. 1978. Slope movement, types and processes. In: Landslides, Analysis and Control, Schuster,
R.L. and Krizek, R.J. (Eds.), National Academy of Science, Report 176, Washington, DC, 11–35.
Waltham, A.C. and Fookes, P.G. 2003. Engineering classification of karst ground conditions. Quarterly
Journal Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 36, 101–118.
Ward, W.H., Burland, J.B. and Gallois, R.W. 1968. Geotechnical assessment of a site at Mundford,
Norfolk, for a large proton accelerator. Geotechnique, 18, 399–431.
Weaver, J. M. 1975. Geological factors significant in the assessment of rippability. The Civil Engineer in
South Africa, 17, 313–316.
Wichter, L. 1979. On the geotechnical properties of Jurassic clay shale. Proceedings Fourth International
Congress International Society Rock Mechanics,Montreaux, 3, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 319–328.
Whitworth, M.C.Z., Giles, D.P. and Murphy, W. 2005. Airborne remote sensing for landslide hazard
assessment: a case study on the Jurassic escarpment slopes of Worcestershire, UK. Quarterly Journal
Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 38, 285–300.
Wild, S., Kinuthia, J.M., Jones, G.I. and Higgins, D.D. 1999. Suppression of swelling associated
with ettringite formation in lime stabilized sulphate bearing clays soils by partial substitution of lime with
ground granulated blast furnace slag. Engineering Geology, 51, 257–277.
Williams, A.A.B. and Pidgeon, J.T. 1983. Evapotranspiration and heaving clays in South Africa.
Geotechnique, 33, 141–150.
Williams, D.M. and McNamara, K. 1992. Limestone to dolomite to dedolomite conversion and its effect
on rock strength: a case study. Quarterly Journal Engineering Geology,24, 131–135.
573
E n g i n e e r i n g G e o l o g y
Winkler, E.M. 1973. Stone Properties, Durability in Man’s Environment. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Xeidakis, G., Koudoumakis, and Tsirambides, A. 2004. Road construction on swelling soils: the case of
Strymi Soils, Rhodope, Thrace, northern Greece. Bulletin Engineering Geology and the Environment,
63, 93–101.
Yates, P.G.J. 1992. The material strength of sandstones of the Sherwood Sandstone Group of north
Staffordshire with reference to microfabric. Quarterly Journal Geological Society,25, 107–113.
Yavuz, A.B., Turk, N. and Koca, M.Y. 2005. Geological parameters affecting the marble production in the
quarries along the southern flank of the Menderes Massif, in SW Turkey. Engineering Geology, 80,
214–241.
Yesilnacar, M.I. and Cetin, H. 2005. Site selection for hazardous wastes: a case study from the GAP
area, Turkey. Engineering Geology, 81, 371–388.
Younger, P.L. 2002. Coalfield closure and the water environment in Europe. Transactions Institution
Mining and Metallurgy, Section A, Mining Technology, 111, A201–A209.
Yuzer, E. 1982. Engineering properties and evaporitic formations of Turkey. Bulletin International
Association Engineering Geology,25, 107–110.
Zhao, J. 1997a. Joint surface matching and shear strength. Part A: joint matching coefficient (JMC).
International Journal Rock Mechanics Mining Science,34, 173–178.
Zhao, J. 1997b. Joint surface matching and shear strength. Part B: JRC-JMC shear strength criterion.
International Journal Rock Mechanics Mining Science,34, 179–185.
574
Index
acid mine drainage, 197–199 calcite, 21, 23
aerial photographs, 317, 318 calcrete, 234
alkali aggregate reaction, 293, 294 capillarity, 151
alkali-carbonate rock reaction, 294 capillary fringe, 156, 170
alluvial cone, 133 cementation, 26, 36
bahada, 133 chalk, 36, 111, 269, 270, 301
amphibole, 1, 12 clay, 33, 201, 206, 217, 225, 233, 244,
hornblende, 1, 13, 14, 17 294, 302, 309, 455, 456
amphibolite, 23 activity, 218, 220
andalusite, 21 ball, 34, 302, 303
andesite, 14, 293, 297, 514 china (kaolin), 34, 302, 303
anhydrite, 36, 37, 82, 273, 275, 473, 478, compressibility, 222
505, 518 fireclay, 302
anticline, 47, 48 heave, 222, 223
aplite, 12 sensitivity, 224, 225
aquiclude, 153 strength, 223, 224
aquifer, 153, 154, 155, 164, 174, 175, 176, swelling, 219–222
177, 182, 183, 187, 189–192, 196, clay gouge, 60
197, 499 clay ironstones, 38
aquitard, 154 clay minerals, 33–35, 304, 306, 308
artesian well, 155 illite, 34, 217, 218, 220
artificial recharge, 190, 191 kaolinite, 34, 217, 218,
220, 304
band drains, 534, 535, 546, 547 montmorillonite, 35, 217, 218,
barren ground, 56 220, 229
basalt, 14, 257, 258, 293, 294, 297, 473, 514 chert, 38
slaking, 284, 297, 473 chevron (zig-zag) fold,
batholith, 4 chlorite, 21, 22
bauxite, 83 cleavage, 16, 22, 52, 515
bedding plane, 3, 28, 29, 44 flow, 52, 53
black clay, 229 fracture, 52–54, 58
blasting, 457 coal, 37
borehole/drillhole, 318–320 coast, 138
cameras, 320 bay-bars, 144
closed-circuit television, 320 bay-head beaches, 144
log, 320 beach, 142, 143
borehole extensometer, 345 bench, 138, 139
bosses, 4 berm, 143
breccia, 31, 457 cliff, 138–140
brick making, 303–307 cuspate foreland, 144
bricks, 307–309 offshore bar, 144
bumping ground, 475 spits, 144
buried channel, 505, 518, 538 tombolas, 144
575
I n d e x
coastal protection, 410, 411 drainage system, 100, 101
artificial replenishment, 411, 413 back swamp deposits, 110
groynes, 410 base flow, 107
offshore breakwaters, 411 bifurcation ratio, 101
seawalls, 411, 413 braided river, 104
columnar jointing, 9, 10 buried channel, 105
compaction, 524, 531 drainage density, 101, 102, 107
cone penetrometer, 335 flood plain, 102, 110
conglomerate, 31 fluvial deposition, 110
connate water, 151 fluvial erosion, 108, 109
contact aureole, 20, 21 fluvial transportation, 109
contaminated land, 447, 449–451 hydraulic radius, 106
cordierite, 21 incised meander, 104, 110
core orientator, 72, 73 levees, 110
creep, 88, 90, 126 meanders, 102–104
critical hydraulic gradient, 172 oxbow lake, 103, 110
cross (current) bedding, 29 plain stage, 103
cross-hole methods, tomography, point bar, 110
364, 365 river terrace, 104, 105
electrical resistance, 365 stream length ratio, 101
radar, 364, 365 stream order, 101
seismic, 364 torrent stage, 103
crush breccia, 24, 60 valley stage, 103
crush conglomerate, 24, 60 drillability, 456, 457
cut-off trench, 504 drillhole logging techniques,
361–364
dams, 507–511 calliper, 363, 364
arch, 508, 509 dipmeter, 361
buttress, 509 induction, 361, 362
composite, 511, 519 radioactive, 363
earth, 509, 510, 518, 519, 520 resistivity, 361
gravity, 507, 508 sonic, 363
rockfill, 510, 511 spontaneous potential, 362, 363
derelict land, 446–448 drilling, 327–334
desk study, 312, 313 core barrel, 329–332
desert dunes, 128–131, 416–418 full-face bits, 328
barkhan, 128, 129, 131 rotary percussion drills, 327
longitudinal dunes, 131 dunes, 408, 409, 413
seif, 128, 129, 131 duricrust, 132
diachronism, 39 dyke, 1, 2, 163
diggability, 462 dynamic compaction, 546, 548–550
dilatometer, 342
diorite, 14 earth pressure cell, 345
dip, 47 earthquakes, 388, 389, 392, 474, 475,
disharmonic fold, 50 520, 526
dispersive soil, 229–232, 521 aftershocks, 388
dolerite, 14, 257, 293, 294, 297 foreshocks, 388
dolomite, 23 intensity, 389
dolostone, 35, 36, 82, 111, 266, 268, magnitude, 389
286, 301 seismic zoning, 395
576
Index
effective pressure, 170, 172, 182, footings, 539, 540, 544, 546
223, 224 fracture
electromagnetic methods, 356, 357 set mapping, 72
ground probing radar, spacing index, 71
357, 471 free swelling coefficient, 85
terrain conductivity, 356 freyssinet jack test, 341
very-low-frequency frost
method, 356 heave, 246, 525
engineering shattering, 125
geology maps, 368, 369 frozen soil, 242–246
geomorphological maps,
365, 367 gabbro, 14, 294, 454, 457
environmental garnet, 23
geology maps, 367, 368 gases, 5, 6, 8, 9, 16, 20, 24,
impact assessment, 378 478, 479
excavation support ratio, 495, 496 geodurability classification,
86, 473
fan fold, 50 geographical information systems, 369,
faults, 3, 163, 388, 389, 392, 393, 440, 376, 382, 397, 445, 450
441, 471, 474, 496, 506, 520 geogrids, 526, 530, 534
fault geomembrane, 530
creep, 392 geotechnical maps, 369
zone, 519 geotextiles, 529, 530
faunal succession, Law of, 44 glacial effects, 123, 124
feldspar, 1, 12–14, 17, 24, 31, 33, 35 buried channel, 124
albite, 1 marine terrace, 123
anorthite, 1 overflow channel, 123
orthoclase, 1, 21 pro-glacial lake, 123
plagioclase, 21 glacial hazards, 418, 420
fiord, 118 glacial terrain, 518
fissures, 61, 225, 237, 238, 259, 264, 440, glaciers, 114, 115
455, 456 corrie, 116
flint, 38 crag/tail, 116
floods, 401–407, 526 drumlin, 116
control, 405–407 moraine, 119, 120
design, 404, 405 U-shaped valley, 116
flash, 401 gneiss, 17, 21, 23, 258, 259, 297, 454,
peak discharge, 402 457, 515
plain management, 403–407 graded bedding, 29
plain zones, 403 granite, 12, 285, 286, 288, 293, 294, 454,
recurrence interval, 402, 403 457, 514
flowmeter, 180 granodiorite, 12
flownet, 182 granulite, 23
fluvio-glacial deposits, 120, 121, 123 gravel, 31, 110, 201, 206, 210, 232,
eskers, 123 297–301, 500
kame terraces, 121 gravity methods, 360, 361
kames, 121 greenschist, 23
varve. 121 greywacke, 29, 32, 294, 296, 297
foliation, 16, 17 ground freezing, 501
foot wall, 55 ground water divide, 504
577
I n d e x
grout, 526, 548 karst topography, 111, 473, 474
groutability, 522, 547 caves, 112, 473, 517
grout curtain, 522, 523 clints, 111
grouting, 501, 504, 547 dry valleys, 114
consolidation, 522 grykes, 111
gypcrete, 234 hums, 113
gypsum, 36, 82, 111, 273, 275, 473, 478, limestone pavements, 111
505, 517, 518, 528 pipes, 126
ponors, 113
hade, angle of, 55 sinkholes, 112, 113, 126, 269,
halite, 37, 273, 275, 276 473, 526
hand augering, 320, 321 uvalas, 113
hanging wall, 55 kyanite, 23
hazard maps, 381, 382
hazardous waste, 427–429 lamination, 29, 35
heave, 55, 456 laterite, 34, 83, 227, 228
hornfels, 21, 22, 297, 454, 515 latosols (red earths), 228
hydraulic lava, 1, 5, 8, 9, 505
gradient, 165 landslides, 90–100, 396–398, 400, 519, 525
uplift, 173 debris avalanches, 99
hydrocompaction, 133 debris flows, 99
hydrothermal solutions, 20, 24 debris slides, 97, 99
dry flows, 99
ice contact deposits, 238, 239 earth flow, 100
eskers, 240 falls, 95
kames, 240 landslide hazard mapping, 396–398
outwash fans, 240 landslide management, 398
ice wedges, 125 landslide prevention, 398, 400
ignimbrite, 8 mud flows, 99
inclinometer, 345 retrogressive slides, 97
induced infiltration, 183 rock slides, 99
induced seismicity, 445, 446 rotational slides, 97
induced sinkholes, 443–445 toppling, 95, 96
infiltration, 151 translational slides, 97
in situ shear test, 342, 344 landfill gas, 427
integral sampling, 72, 73 lavas, 8–10, 257
intraformational shears, 58 leachate, 183, 184, 424, 426
involutions, 125 light cable and tool boring rig, 322–324
isoclinal fold, 50 lime/cement columns, 550
limestone, 21, 35, 36, 38, 82, 83, 111,
joints, 61, 62, 63–67, 269, 471, 266–269, 284, 286–288, 293, 294,
472, 515 296, 297, 301, 455, 505, 516, 517
compressive strength, 69 line drilling, 457, 458
matching coefficient, 67 liquefaction, 213, 393, 394, 539
roughness coefficient, 67, 69 lithification, 26, 36
set, 61 loess, 33, 34, 214, 216, 217
shear, 58, 59
system, 61, 496 magma, 1, 3–6, 21
tension, 58 magnetic methods, 357–360
juvenile water, 151, 185 marble, 21, 23, 111, 286, 288, 457, 515
578
Index
Menard pressure meter, 342 piezometer, 170, 171
meteoric water, 151 piezometric
mica, 1, 17, 22 level, 165, 504
biotite, 1, 12–14, 17, 21 pressure, 154, 155
muscovite, 1, 12, 21 surface, 155, 164
mine subsidence, 434–436 piles, 540, 541, 544
assessment of hazards, 436–438 pipes, 9
bell pits, 435 piping, 173, 229, 230, 232, 521
longwall mining, 438, 439 pits, 322
pillar and stall mining, 435, 436 plate loading tests, 338–341, 543
mine waste, 431–433 playa, 134
spoil heaps, 431, 432 salina, 134
tailings, 432, 433 polished stone value, 296
monocline, 50 popping, 475, 498
mudrock, 84, 473 pore water pressure, 169, 170–172, 213,
mudstone, 35, 84, 477 223, 225, 245, 246, 249, 262, 265,
mylonite, 24, 60 336, 476, 500, 512, 513, 518, 522,
531, 534, 535, 543
nitrate pollution, 195 porosity, 157–160, 166, 168, 175, 176
norite, 14 power augers, 322
preliminary reconnaissance, 313
offlap, 39 precompression, 534, 535, 546
olivine, 1, 12 pre-splitting, 458, 484
overbreak, 457, 482, 483 pressure bulkhead machine, 481
overfold, 48 pseudotachyllite, 24, 60
overlap, 39 pyrite, 35, 38, 305, 433, 473,
overstep, 41 478, 528
overthrust, 58 pyroclasts, 1, 5–7, 257, 258,
505, 514
packing, 28 agglomerate, 7
parallel fold, 50 ash, 6, 7
peat, 37, 247, 249 bombs, 6
pediment, 133 cinders, 6
pedocrete, 132 lappilli, 6.
calcrete, 132 tuff, 7
pegmatite, 12 volcanic breccia, 7
percolation, 151, 152 welded tuff, 7
permafrost, 124 pyroxene, 1, 12, 14
talik, 124 augite, 1
permeability, 157, 161, 163, 166, 172, 180
permeability tests, 178 quarrying, 277, 291, 292, 302
constant head, 178 quartz, 1, 12, 17, 21, 23, 24, 31, 33, 35,
falling head, 178 303, 304, 308
field pumping, 180 quartzite, 21, 23, 293, 294, 454, 515
packer, 178 quartz porphyry, 13
rising head, 178 quick clay, 241
pheatic water, quick sand, 172, 173
photographs, 75, 76
phyllite, 16, 22, 258, 512, 515 radioactive waste, 429–431
piezocone, 336 rafts, 540, 544
579
I n d e x
rebound, 513 shape, 28
recumbent fold, 48 shear zone, 515
recurrence interval, 106 shield tunnelling, 480
reinforced earth, 465, 467, 535 shotcrete, 485, 500, 505
reinforcing wire mesh, 485, 500 sill, 3, 4
remote imagery, 313–317 sillimanite, 21
infrared linescanning, 315 silt, 32, 201, 206, 213, 214, 216, 232, 233,
light detecting and ranging 500, 519
system, 316 siltstone, 32, 33
permanent scatterer interferometry, similar fold, 50
316, 317 slaking, 84, 262, 266
side-looking airborne radar, 315, 316 durability test, 84, 85
resistivity method, 175, 352–356, 471 slate, 16, 22, 258, 287, 288, 512, 515
retention capacity, 151 slickensides, 59
rhyolite, 13, 297, 514 slope stabilization, 463
rippability, 458, 460 cribs, 465, 466
risk, 381, 382, 385, 388, 395 dentition, 464
roadheader, 481 dowels, 464
rock bolts, 485, 500 drainage, 466, 468, 470
rock bursts, 475, 498 fences, 463
rock mass factor, 71 gabions, 465, 466
RMR(rock mass rating), 486, 489 gunite, 465
rock mass quality, 489, 495 reinforced earth, 465, 467
RQD(rock quality designation), 70 retaining walls, 465
rock anchors, 464
sabkha soil, 233, 234 rock bolts, 464
safe yield, 189, 190, 502 shotcrete, 465
saline intrusion, 196 smooth blasting, 484, 485, 499, 515
sampling soil, 325–327 specific retention, 159, 160
Delft sampler, 327 specific yield, 160
disturbed, 325 spring, 174
standard sampling tube, 326 soft ground, 476, 477
thin-walled piston, 326 firm, 476
undisturbed, 325, 326 flowing, 476
sand, 31, 110, 201, 206, 210–213, 232, ravelling, 476
233, 244, 299–301, 455, 500 squeezing, 476, 477
sandstone, 21, 31–33, 38, 259–262, 279, swelling, 477
284, 285, 287, 288, 293, 296, 455, soil conservation, 422
515, 516 soil erosion, 420–424
sandwicks, 546, 547 soil stabilization, 524, 528, 529
sanitary landfill, 424–427 cement, 528
scan line method, 72 lime, 528
schist, 22, 23, 258, 457, 515 soil suction, 157, 221
schistosity, 16, 17, 22, 61, 515 suction pressure, 157
sediment yield, 507 solifluction, 90, 125, 126
seismic methods, 175, 348–352 spiracles, 9
refraction, 349–352, 471 standard penetration test, 334,
self-boring pressuremeter, 342 335, 543
shale, 34, 35, 262–266, 294, 302, 454, stand-up time/bridging capacity,
456, 477, 512, 516 485, 486
swell-shrink, 264, 265 staurolite, 23
580
Index
steel arches, 485 vibro
stereonet, 76 compaction, 546
stocks, 4 displacement, 548, 549
storage flotation, 548
capacity, 502, 503 replacement, 548
coefficient, 164, 168 vibrograph, 458
storm surge, 144, 146, 147, 411, 413 virgin rock temperature, 479
strike, 47 void ratio, 158
stone, durability, 278, 279 VOCs (volatile organic chemicals), 184, 185
acid immersion test, 278, 279 volcano, 1, 5
crystallization test, 278, 279 recurrence interval, 385, 386
deleterious salts, 283 volcanic activity, 5, 383–386
frost damage, 279 volcanic zones, 4, 388
subsidence, fluid abstraction, 439–443
solution mining, 442 wash boring, 324, 325
superposition, Law of, 39 water table, 151, 152, 174, 176, 177, 190,
syenite, 13, 288 192, 194, 227
syncline, 47 waves, 135–138, 407, 408
backwash , 137, 139, 140, 143
talus (scree), 519 clapotis, 139
tectonic shear zone, 55 fetch, 136
tension gashes, 54, 55 forced, 136
tides, 138 free, 136
till, 34, 119, 235–238 longshore (litoral) drift, 143, 144,
ablation, 235 408, 409
lodgement, 235 longshore current, 142, 143
tortuosity, 163 oscillatory, 135
throw, 55 plunging breakers, 137, 139
time-rock unit, 42 rip currents, 137, 138, 142
tracers, 181, 182 surging breakers, 137
trachyte, 14 swash, 137, 139, 143
transmissivity, 152, 161, 168, 180, 189 translation, 137
trap efficiency, 507 wave refraction, 140, 142
trenches, 322 weathering, 77–84, 473
tsunami, 147–149, 386, 414–416 chemical, 81–84
tunnelling boring machine, 471, classification, 87, 88
481, 482 mechanical, 79–81
rate, 78, 79
uplift pressure, 513 salt, 131, 132
well, 186–189
vadose water, 152 cone of depression, 188
valley bulging, 90 drawdown, 186
vane test, 336, 337 wind erosion, 127, 128
varved clay, 240, 241
velocity ratio, 71 zone of aeration, 151, 152
vesicles, 9 zone of saturation, 151, 152, 156
581
This page intentionally left blank