Engineering Geology
Topic 1: Introduction
INTRODUCTION: (Importance to a Civil Engineer):
The earlier studies of Civil Engineering couldn’t see the design of a structure should be
preceded by a careful study of its environment, particularly foundations material on which the
structure was to be placed. When the St. Francis Dam in Southern California failed in
1928 with a loss of many lives and damages in millions of dollars, the civil engineering
profession awoke to the idea that the careful design of a structure itself is not all that
is required for the safety of structures. After the failure of St. Francis Dam, the need of
environment exploration with proper interpretation of the results was understood by all.
Geology (in Greek, Geo means Earth, logos means study of or Science of) is a branch
of science dealing with the study of the Earth. It is also known as earth science. The study of
the earth comprises of the whole earth, its origin, structure, composition and history
(including the development of life) and the nature of the processes.
Branches of Geology:
CH.Kireety Page 1
Engineering Geology
Relevance of geology to civil engineering:
Most civil engineering projects involve some excavation of soils and rocks, or involve loading
the Earth by building on it. In some cases, the excavated rocks may be used
as constructional material, and in others, rocks may form a major part of the finished product,
such as a motorway cutting of the site or a reservoir. The feasibility, the planning and
design, the construction and costing, and the safety of a project may depend critically on the
geological conditions where the construction will take place. This is especially the case in
extended ‘greenfield’ sites, where the area affected by the project stretches for kilometers,
across comparatively undeveloped ground. In modest projects or in those involving the
redevelopment of a limited site, the demands on the geological knowledge of the engineer
or the need for geological advice will be less, but are never negligible. Site investigation
by boring and by testing samples may be an adequate preliminary to construction
in such cases. The long term economics depends on the engineering safety of the manmade
constructions. Durability and maintenance free service of the dams, canals, structures like
aqueduct etc. is only possible if engineering safety of them is assured. As every structure
is related to rock beneath, proper geological investigations are of utmost importance.
Engineering geology importance:
Engineering geology provides a systematic knowledge of construction material, its
occurrence, composition, durability, and other properties. Examples of such construction
materials are building-stones, road materials, clays, limestone, and laterite.
The knowledge of the geological work of natural agencies such as water, wind, ice and
earthquake helps in planning and carrying out major civil engineering works. For examples,
the knowledge of erosion, transportation, and deposition helps greatly in solving the
expensive problems of river control, coastal and harbour work and soil conservation.
The knowledge about groundwater that occurs in the subsurface rocks and about its
quantity and depth of occurrence is required in connection with water supply irrigation,
excavation and may other civil engineering works.
The foundation problems of dams, bridges, and buildings are directly concerned with
the geology of the area where they are to be built. In these works, drilling is commonly
undertaken to explore the ground conditions. Geology helps greatly in interpreting the
drilling data.
In tunnelling, constructing roads, canals, and docks and in determining the stability of cuts and
slopes, the knowledge about the nature and structure of rocks is very necessary.
CH.Kireety Page 2
Engineering Geology
Before starting a major engineering project at a place a detailed geological report, which is
accompanied by geological maps and sections, is prepared. Such a report helps in planning
and constructing the project.
The stability of the civil engineering structures is considerably increased if the geological
features like faults,1 joints,2 folding,3 and solution channels etc. in the rock beds are properly
located and suitably treated.
In the study of soil mechanics, it is necessary to know how the soil materials are formed in
nature.
For a major engineering project, precise geological survey is carried out and results thus
obtained are used in solving engineering problems at hand. The cost of engineering works will
considerably be reduced if the geological survey of the area concerned is done before hand.
1- fault: a fracture or fracture zone in rock along which movement has occurred. 2- joint: a fracture in rock along
which there has been no displacement. 3- fold: a bend or flexure in a rock unit or series of rock units that has been
caused by crustal movements.
Engineering Geologist Vs Civil Engineer:
The engineering geologist presents geological data and interpretations for use by the civil
engineer. The civil engineers have to deal mostly with soil and rocks, timbers, steel,
and concrete. In a great majority of civil engineering, projects and the designs, involve the soils
and rocks almost directly.
Civil engineering is to construct the structure and facilities for transport, water supply,
hydropower, flood control, environmental protection, sewage and waste disposal, urban
development and more. In above fields, civil engineers construct and maintain waterways,
highways, railway, pipelines, dam and reservoirs and tunnels.
BRIEF STUDY OF CASE HISTORIES OF FAILURE OF SOME CIVIL ENGINEERING
CONSTRUCTIONS DUE TO GEOLOGICAL DRAW BACKS:
Brief study of case histories of failure of some civil engineering constructions:
With reference to Dams
1. St. Francis Dam
2. Austin Dam
3. Lafayette Dam
Note: Geological studies at the dam site will also suggest which design is suitable for a given
geological context. For example, Gravity dam needs very strong and competent foundation
rocks; for buttress dams, relatively less strong foundation rocks are enough; arch dam need
very strong and stable abutment rocks; for earth dams, even weak foundation rocks meets the
requirement.
CH.Kireety Page 3
Engineering Geology
With reference to Reservoir
1. Jerome reservoir of Idaho
2. Hondo reservoir of Mexico
Note: intense weathering in the rocks upstream causes silting problem. Porosity and
permeability of rocks, occurrence of faults, joints and other weak planes cause leakage
problems. Ground water conditions also play a major role in influencing leakage. Thus proper
studies of geological conditions at any proposed reservoir site will forewarn an engineer of the
problems, if any.
With reference to Tunnels
1. Ram-ganga diversion tunnel (Himalaya)
2. Umiam-Barapani tunnel (Meghalaya)
3. Koyna Tunnel (Bombay)
Note: Competence of rocks, associated geological structures like bedding, faults, joints,
porosity and permeability of rocks, and ground water conditions are the geological conditions
which need to be thoroughly studied to solve such problems.
GEOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS IN CIVIL ENGINEERING
The geology of an area dictates the location and nature of any civil engineering structures.
Roads and Railways
Problems for a road or railway project may be caused by any of the following geological
features:
• Faults
• Junctions between hard and soft formations
• Boundaries between porous and impermeable
formations
• Spring-lines
• Fractured granites
• weathered schists2
• Landslip areas
• Areas where beds dip towards the road or railway, as shown in the adjacent
diagram.
1 - A passage for surplus water from a dam.
2 - A coarse-grained metamorphic rock that consists of layers of different minerals and can be split into thin irregular
plates.
CH.Kireety Page 4
Engineering Geology
Dams:
Geological investigations of a site proposed for construction of a dam must be complete
and detailed. Features such as rock-types, geological structures, weathering, fractures and
fissures must all be considered. The main considerations are that the material on which
the dam rests must be able to carry the weight of the structure without failing. The
geology upon which the dam is built must also be impervious1 to water. The abutments2,
(the rock faces to which the dam wall is attached) must also be impervious and
strong enough to support the dam wall, especially in the case of an arch dam
(where more force is transmitted to the abutments).
Failure of a dam can be due to many factors including:
• Earthquakes
• A sudden drop in water level
• Inadequate protection of the reservoir side of the dam from wave action
• Insufficient spillway capacity, so that water flows over the whole of the
dam surface, with consequent erosion
1 - Not allowing something to pass through; not penetrable. 2 - A structure built to support the lateral pressure of an arch or
span, e.g., at the ends of a bridge.
The type of dam selected depends largely on the nature of the surrounding rocks. If they are
strong and stable, an arch dam, such as the one shown below can be constructed. This type of
dam requires a minimum of construction materials, but the concrete must be of high
quality. The Barossa Reservoir Dam (the Whispering Wall), The Roosevelt Dam are examples
of an arch dams.
An earth and rock fill embankment dam, as shown in the diagram below must be
constructed where the surrounding rocks are not strong enough to support an arch dam.
This type of dam is more expensive to build, requiring much more material. The main weight
and strength of the dam is provided by compacted quarried rock. The core is made of
impermeable material, such as clay, bitumen1 or concrete.
CH.Kireety Page 5
Engineering Geology
1 - A black viscous mixture of hydrocarbons obtained naturally or as a residue from petroleum distillation.
IMPORTANCE OF PHYSICAL GEOLOGY
This is also variously described as dynamic geology, geomorphology, etc. As the name suggests
it deals with:
(i) Different physical features of the earth, such as mountains, plateaus, valleys, rivers,
lakes, glaciers, and volcanoes in terms of their origin and development,
(ii) The different changes occurring on the earth's surface, like marine transgression,
marine regression, formation or disappearance of rivers, springs and lakes,
(iii) Geological work of wind, glaciers, rivers, oceans, ground water, and their role in
constantly molding the earth's surface features, and
(iv) Natural phenomena like landslides, earthquakes, and weathering.
The main cause for surface changes is weathering. This is a natural phenomenon resulting
directly or indirectly due to changes in the atmosphere. It disintegrates and decomposes rocks.
This aspect is of special importance from the civil engineering point of view, because color,
appearance, strength and durability of rocks are adversely affected by weathering. Thus even
granite which is considered ideal for most of the civil engineering works becomes weak and
friable on thorough weathering, rendering it useless.
Civil engineers deal with structures like dams which are artificial barriers to the natural flow
of rivers. Proper understanding of the geological work of a river and its features will lead to
their better utilization for engineering applications
IMPORTANCE OF PETROLOGY
Petrology (Petro = rock, logos = study) deals with the study of rocks. The earth's crust, also
called lithosphere, is made up of different petrology types of rocks. Petrology deals with mode
of formation, structure, texture, composition, occurrence, types, etc., of rocks. The
composition and textural characters of rocks primarily contribute to their inherent strength
and durability. Rocks based on their suitability can be used as foundation for dams, for
tunneling and materials of construction. Hence this is the most important branch of geology
from the civil as engineering point of view.
CH.Kireety Page 6
Engineering Geology
IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY
Structural Geology the rocks which form the earth's crust undergo various deformations,
dislocations and disturbances under the influence of tectonic forces. The result is the
occurrence of different geological structures like folds, faults, joints and unconforimities in
rocks. The details of mode of formation. Causes. Types, classification, importance, etc., of
these geological structures form the subject matter of structural geology. From the civil
engineering point of view, it is as important as petrology because these geological structures
modify the inherent physical characters of rocks rendering them more suitable or unsuitable
for civil engineering purposes. For example, at a dam site sedimentary rocks with upstream
dip provide a desirable geological set-up, while the same rocks with downstream dip make the
geological set-up most undesirable.
CH.Kireety Page 7
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 8
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 9
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 10
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 11
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 12
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 13
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 14
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 15
Engineering Geology
Effects of weathering on granite:
Granite is an igneous rock that injects, or intrudes, as magma into Earth’s crust and then cools.
It consists of four main mineral compounds. Two of these are types of feldspar, a group of
silica compounds that constitute the most abundant mineral group on Earth. Plagioclase
feldspar is a compound of sodium and silica; potassic feldspar is a compound of potassium and
silica. Granite also contains quartz, the second most abundant rock-forming mineral after
feldspar. The fourth main mineral compound is mica, which in granite is a silica compound
with a crystalline appearance resembling sheets of paper. Muscovite is mica with a high
concentration of potassium. Biotite is mica with iron and magnesium. Each of these mineral
groups weathers according to its own chemical properties.
1. Cooling
Granite cools slowly within the Earth’s crust. Feldspar, quartz and mica crystals form during
the cooling. Vertical and horizontal fissures form within the rock mass as it contracts. The
fissures expand to larger fractures as the rock cools further.
2. Wind
Wind, water and ice denude the soil and Earth’s crust overlying the granite mass, exposing it to
the atmosphere. The rock expands and contracts in reaction to changes in temperature. It
shatters on the surface and the fractures widen to form crevices.
3. Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis is the chemical weathering of minerals by a mildly acidic water that forms when rains
dissolves trace gases in the atmosphere. The reaction of feldspar minerals in granite with
rainwater produces kaolinite, white clay known as “China clay” used in the production of
porcelain, paper and glass. Kaolinite is most abundant over weathered granite in hot and moist
tropical climates. Biotite and muscovite micas also weather by hydrolysis into kaolinite and
release iron, potassium and magnesium into the surrounding soil as nutrients.
CH.Kireety Page 16
Engineering Geology
Topic 2: MINERALOGY
Mineral:
A mineral may be defined as a natural, inorganic, homogeneous, solid substance having a
definite chemical composition and regular atomic structure.
To call any substance a mineral, the requirements to be fulfilled are:
1. It must have been formed by natural process
2. It must be homogeneous, i.e. All parts of the minerals should possess the same physical
and chemical characters
3. It must be inorganic substance, i.e., substances of wood or any other organic material
cannot be called mineral
4. It must be solid, i.e. gaseous, liquid or semisolid substances are not minerals.
5. It must have a definite chemical composition.
6. It must be crystalline.
Importance of study of minerals:
From civil engineering point of view, studies of minerals are very important because:
1. The civil engineers need to know the properties of rocks precisely to enable them to
consider different rocks for any purpose, i.e. foundation rocks, as road metal. As
concrete aggregate, as building stones, as flooring or roofing materials , as decorative
material etc.
2. The economic minerals, since they are scarce, do not influence the properties of their
constituent minerals, and hence irrelevant from the civil engineering point of view. But,
if they happen to occur in large quantities, their economic value will not permit them to
be used as construction materials or as foundation sites.
Thus properties of civil engineering importance such as strength, durability and appearance of
rocks can be assessed only with the knowledge of the minerals that form rocks.
Engineering Significance of Rock Forming Minerals
The civil engineers need to know the properties of rocks precisely to enable them to consider
different rocks for any required purpose, i.e., as foundation rocks, as road meta, as concrete
aggregate, as building stones, as flooring or roofing material, as decorative material etc. All
properties of rocks are, in turn, depended on the properties of their constituent minerals. Thus,
properties of civil engineering importance such as their strength, durability and appearance of
rocks can be assessed only with the knowledge of the minerals that form rocks i.e. rock-forming
minerals.
The economic minerals, since they are scare, do not influence the properties of rocks and are
hence irrelevant from the civil engineering point of view. However, if they happen to occur in
large quantities, their economic value will not permit them to be used either as construction
materials or as foundation sites.
Different methods of study of minerals
1. Study of physical properties
2. Study of chemical composition
3. Study of optical properties
4. X-ray analysis
CH.Kireety Page 17
Engineering Geology
Physical Properties
Over 4,000 minerals are known to man, and these minerals are identified by their physical and
chemical properties. The physical properties of minerals are determined by the atomic
structure and crystal chemistry of the minerals. The most common physical properties are
crystal form, color, hardness, cleavage, and specific gravity.
Crystals
Cleavage and Fracture
Color
Hardness
Streak
Luster
Specific Gravity
Tenacity
Acid Test
Magnetism
Fluorescence
Crystals
One of the best aids in the identification of a mineral is its crystal form (external shape). A
crystal is defined as a homogenous solid possessing a three-dimensional internal order defined
by the lattice structure.
Crystals developed under favorable conditions often exhibit characteristic geometric forms
(which are outward expressions of the internal arrangements of atoms), crystal class, and
cleavage. Large, well-developed crystals are not common because of unfavorable growth
conditions, but small crystals recognizable with a hand lens or microscope are common.
Minerals that show no external crystal form but possess an internal crystalline structure are
said to be massive. A few minerals, such as limonite and opal, have no orderly arrangement of
atoms and are said to be amorphous.
Crystals are divided into six major classes based on their geometric form: isometric, tetragonal,
hexagonal, orthorhombic, monoclinic, and triclinic. The hexagonal system also has a
rhombohedral subdivision, which applies mainly to carbonates.
Cleavage and Fracture
After minerals are formed, they have a tendency to split or break along definite planes of
weakness. This property is called cleavage. These planes of weakness are closely related to the
internal structure of the mineral, and are usually, but not always, parallel to crystal faces or
possible crystal faces. Minerals may have one, two, three, four, or six directions of cleavage.
These cleavage forms are (1) cubic, (2) octahedral, (3) dodecahedral, (4) rhombohedral, (5)
prismatic, and (6) pinacoidal. Minerals that break easily along these lines of weakness yield
shiny surfaces. Many crystals do not cleave, but fracture or break instead. Quartz, for example,
forms well-developed crystal faces but does not cleave at all; instead it fractures or breaks
randomly with a conchoidal fracture.
CH.Kireety Page 18
Engineering Geology
Color
The color of a mineral is the most important identifying characteristic for the amateur
mineralogist. Many minerals exhibit various colors; the varieties are mainly due to impurities or
a slight change in chemical composition. For example, calcite can be white, blue, yellow, pink, or
fluorescent. Surface tarnish may have changed the color of the specimen; therefore, a fresh
surface should be examined.
Hardness
The hardness (scratchability) of a mineral can be measured by its resistance to scratching or
abrasion. Mohs scale is a set of 10 common minerals chosen for comparative hardness. The
minerals are arranged in order of increasing hardness; each mineral will scratch all that precede
it, and be scratched by all that follow it. Mohs scale (1-10) is as follows:
 talc
 gypsum
 calcite
 fluorite
 apatite
 orthoclase
 quartz
 topaz
 corundum
 diamond
Streak
The streak of a mineral is the color of the powder produced when the mineral is rubbed against
an unglazed porcelain plate or other fine-grained, hard, abrasive surface. The color of a
particular mineral may vary, but the streak is generally constant. The streak may be the same
color as the mineral or an entirely different color, but the streak of all white minerals, including
calcite, is white.
Luster
Luster refers to the brightness of light reflected from the mineral's surface. The main types of
luster are metallic and nonmetallic. Some of the more important nonmetallic lusters are:
Adamantine: brilliant, like that of a diamond.
Earthy: dull, like kaolin.
Silky: having the sheen of silk, like satin spar, a variety of gypsum.
Greasy: oily appearance.
Resinous: waxy appearance, like sphalerite.
Vitreous: the appearance of broken glass, like quartz.
Nacreous (pearly): like mother of pearl; for example, pearly luster on fossil gastropods and
cephalopods.
CH.Kireety Page 19
Engineering Geology
Specific Gravity
The specific gravity (relative density) of a mineral is its weight compared to the weight of an
equal volume of water; thus, a mineral with a specific gravity of 4 is four times heavier than
water. Special instruments are needed to measure the specific gravity.
Tenacity
Tenacity is the measure of a mineral's cohesiveness or toughness. Tenacity terms are:
Brittle: breaks or powders easily; for example, pyrite or marcasite.
Ductile: can be drawn into a wire; for example, copper.
Elastic: bends and resumes its original position or shape when pressure is released; for
example, biotite or muscovite.
Malleable: can be hammered into thin plates or sheets; for example, gold or copper.
Sectile: can be cut or shaved with a knife; for example, gypsum or galena.
Acid Test
When carbonates (especially calcite) are treated with cold, dilute hydrochloric acid, they will
effervesce, foam, and bubble, and give off carbon dioxide gas. When sulfides, such as galena,
pyrite, and sphalerite, are treated with dilute hydrochloric acid, they will give off the rotten-egg
odor of hydrogen sulfide.
Study of chemical compositions:
According to the definition, every mineral is expected to have its own distinctive chemical
composition, which is not to be found in any other mineral.
Therefore, by chemical analysis, if the composition is known it should be possible to identify the
mineral.
This principle is the basis for this type of study of minerals. For example, if the chemical
composition of an unknown mineral is found to be lead sulphide, then that mineral must only
be Gelena, because it only has the composition of lead sulphide and no other mineral has this
composition.
Study of Optical properties:
In this method, the minerals are ground very fine and fixed over glass slides by means of
CANADA BALSAM. Such skillfully prepared slides are called thin sections.
They are studied under a petrlogical microscope.
The properties of minerals like colour, their order, interference figures, cleavage, shape, etc are
studied under crossed nicols, with the help of some other accessories, if necessary.
X-ray Analysis:
X-ray analysis makes use of the definite atomic structure, found in every mineral, X-rays are
similar to light waves but have a much shorter wave length, comparable to the distances
between atoms in a crystalline mineral. When a beam of X-rays falls on crystal, it is diffracted by
layers of atoms within the crystal. In making an x-ray analysis of atomic structure of the crystal,
the diffracted x-rays are allowed to fall on photographic plate, and the resulting photograph
shows a series of spots or lines which form more or less symmetrical pattern. X-ray analysis of
CH.Kireety Page 20
Engineering Geology
minerals reveals their actual atomic structures, which is distinctive for each mineral. This
enables the accurate identification of minerals.
Petrology:
Shell structure of earth:
The interior structure of the Earth is layered in spherical shells. These layers can be defined by
their chemical and their rheological properties. Earth has an outer silicate solid crust, a highly
viscous mantle, a liquid outer core that is much less viscous than the mantle, and a solid inner
core.
Structure of earth:
The crust of earth is made up of different kinds of rocks. The thickness of crust is approximately
35Km. this rocky crust is known as Lithosphere.
The earth crust is uneven with many depressions and elevations.
These depressions are filled with water and are called lakes, seas and oceans. This
discontinuous body of water in association with the lithosphere is called the Hydrosphere.
On land masses of the lithosphere and in water bodies of hydrosphere, all living creatures exist,
this is called Biosphere. All these, in turn are enveloped by a layer of air which is called the
Atmosphere.
Definition of a Rock:
Rock or stone is a natural substance, a solid aggregate of one or more minerals or mineraloids.
The solid mineral material forming part of the surface of the earth and other similar planets,
exposed on the surface or underlying the soil.
CH.Kireety Page 21
Engineering Geology
A rock can be simply defined as “an aggregate of minerals”.
Classification of Rocks:
Using color, texture, and mineral composition, geologists can classify a rock according to its
origin. A rock's origin is how the rock formed. Geologists classify rocks into three major groups:
igneous rock, sedimentary rock, and metamorphic rock.
Igneous rock:
Igneous rock is formed through the cooling and solidification of magma or lava. The magma can
be derived from partial melts of existing rocks in either a planet's mantle or crust. Typically, the
melting is caused by one or more of three processes: an increase in temperature, a decrease in
pressure, or a change in composition. Solidification into rock occurs either below the surface as
intrusive rocks or on the surface as extrusive rocks. Igneous rock may form with crystallization
to form granular, crystalline rocks, or without crystallization to form natural glasses.
Igneous rocks are also geologically important because:
 Their minerals and global chemistry give information about the composition of the
mantle, from which some igneous rocks are extracted, and the temperature and
pressure conditions that allowed this extraction, and/or of other pre-existing rock that
melted;
 Their absolute ages can be obtained from various forms of radiometric dating and thus
can be compared to adjacent geological strata, allowing a time sequence of events;
 Their features are usually characteristic of a specific tectonic environment, allowing
tectonic reconstitutions in some special circumstances they host important mineral
deposits (ores): for example, tungsten, tin, and uranium are commonly associated with
granites and diorites, whereas ores of chromium and platinum are commonly associated
with gabbros.
Sedimentary Rocks:
Sedimentary rocks are types of rock that are formed by the deposition and subsequent
cementation of that material at the Earth's surface and within bodies of water. Sedimentation is
the collective name for processes that cause mineral and/or organic particles (detritus) to settle
in place. The particles that form a sedimentary rock by accumulating are called sediment. Before
being deposited, the sediment was formed by weathering and erosion from the source area, and
then transported to the place of deposition by water, wind, ice, mass movement or glaciers,
which are called agents of denudation.
CH.Kireety Page 22
Engineering Geology
Sedimentation may also occur as minerals precipitate from water solution or shells of aquatic
creatures settle out of suspension.
The sedimentary rock cover of the continents of the Earth's crust is extensive (73% of the Earth's
current land surface, but the total contribution of sedimentary rocks is estimated to be only 8%
of the total volume of the crust. Sedimentary rocks are only a thin veneer over a crust consisting
mainly of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Sedimentary rocks are deposited in layers as strata,
forming a structure called bedding. The study of sedimentary rocks and rock strata provides
information about the subsurface that is useful for civil engineering, for example in the
construction of roads, houses, tunnels, canals or other structures. Sedimentary rocks are also
important sources of natural resources like coal, fossil fuels, drinking water or ores.
Metamorphic rocks:
Metamorphic rocks arise from the transformation of existing rock types, in a process called
metamorphism, which means "change in form". The original rock (protolith) is subjected to heat
(temperatures greater than 150 to 200 °C) and pressure (150 megapascals (1,500
bar))[clarify],causing profound physical and/or chemical change. The protolith may be a
sedimentary, an igneous, or even an existing type of metamorphic rock.
Metamorphic rocks make up a large part of the Earth's crust and form 12% of the Earth's
current land surface. They are classified by texture and by chemical and mineral assemblage
(metamorphic facies). They may be formed simply by being deep beneath the Earth's surface,
subjected to high temperatures and the great pressure of the rock layers above it. They can form
from tectonic processes such as continental collisions, which cause horizontal pressure, friction
and distortion. They are also formed when rock is heated up by the intrusion of hot molten rock
called magma from the Earth's interior. The study of metamorphic rocks (now exposed at the
Earth's surface following erosion and uplift) provides information about the temperatures and
pressures that occur at great depths within the Earth's crust. Some examples of metamorphic
rocks are gneiss, slate, marble, schist, and quartzite.
Rock Cycle:
The rock cycle is a basic concept in geology that describes the time-consuming transitions
through geologic time among the three main rock types: sedimentary, metamorphic, and
igneous. As the adjacent diagram illustrates, each of the types of rocks is altered or destroyed
when it is forced out of its equilibrium conditions. An igneous rock such as basalt may break
down and dissolve when exposed to the atmosphere, or melt as it is subducted under a
continent. Due to the driving forces of the rock cycle, plate tectonics and the water cycle, rocks
do not remain in equilibrium and are forced to change as they encounter new environments.
The rock cycle is an illustration that explains how the three rock types are related to each other,
and how processes change from one type to another over time. This cyclical aspect makes rock
change a geologic cycle and, on planets containing life, a biogeochemical cycle.
CH.Kireety Page 23
Engineering Geology
A diagram of the rock cycle.
1 = magma; 2 = crystallization (freezing of rock); 3 = igneous rocks; 4 = erosion; 5 = sedimentation;
6 = sediments & sedimentary rocks; 7 = tectonic burial and metamorphism; 8 = metamorphic
rocks; 9 = melting.
Forms of Igneous rock:
Igneous rocks are formed in two forms
1. Intrusive igneous rocks
2. Extrusive igneous rocks
Intrusive igneous rocks:
Intrusive, or plutonic, igneous rocks form when magma cools slowly below the Earth's surface.
Most intrusive rocks have large, well-formed crystals.
Examples: granite, gabbro, diorite and dunite.
The most common forms of intrusive igneous bodies as observed in the field are:
Dyke, sill, laccolith, lopolith, bysmalith, phacolith, chonolith,volcanic neck or plug, batholiths
etc.,.
CH.Kireety Page 24
Engineering Geology
Dykes:
A dyke (or dike) in geology is a type of later vertical rock between older layers of rock.
Technically, it is any geologic body which cuts across: flat wall rock structures, such as bedding.
Massive rock formations, usually igneous in origin.
Dikes can be either magmatic or sedimentary in origin. Magmatic dikes form when magma
intrudes into a crack then crystallizes as a sheet intrusion, either cutting across layers of rock or
through an un-layered mass of rock. Clastic dikes are formed when sediment fills a pre-existing
crack.
Sills:
A sill is a sheet-like intrusion that is concordant with external layering such as bedding or
metamorphic foliation. Sills are formed from magma injected along planes of weakness
represented by layering in rocks and are distinct from dykes that cut across layering (i.e. are
discordant).
An intrusive mass of igneous rock which consolidated beneath the surface and has a large
horizontal extent in comparison with its thickness.
CH.Kireety Page 25
Engineering Geology
FORMS OF EXTRUSIVE IGNEOUS ROCKS:
Lava Flows
On eruption of a volcano, lava simply flows on the surface and on consolidation gives rise to lava
flows. These closely resemble sills in shape. Based on surface appearance, lava flows are
described as block lava and ropy lava. Block lava is less mobile and has a rough and irregular
surface. The ropy lava is more mobile and has a wrinkled but smooth and shining surface. The
vesicles are more numerous, spherical and small in ropy lava flow and they are few and irregular
in block lava flow. These physical differences occur because ropy lava comes out hotter and with
lesser volatiles.
Pyroclasts
The rock fragments thrown out at the time of volcanic eruption are called pyroclasts. These are
described variously, based on size and shape. Bigger and angular fragments are called volcanic
blocks. If they are somewhat rounded they are known as volcanic bombs. Smaller fragments are
called lapilli.
Classification of Igneous rocks:
i) Classification based on silica percentage
ii) Classification based on silica saturation
iii) Classification based on depth of formation
Classification based on silica percentage:
The chemical composition of a rock is generally expressed in terms of different (oxides like SiO2
AL2O3, Fe2O3, FeO, Mg0 and C20. Among different oxides silicon dioxide is always predominant
in rocks. Since silica percentage is also responsible for the formation of different minerals and
their associations, it serves as a suitable basis for the classification of igneous rocks. When silica
content exceeds 66%. The igneous rock is called as acidic; when it is 52-66%, the rocks are called
intermediate. The basic rocks have 45-52%. In ultrabasic rocks, the silica content is less than
45%.
CH.Kireety Page 26
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 27
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 28
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 29
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 30
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 31
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 32
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 33
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 34
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 35
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 36
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 37
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 38
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 39
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 40
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 41
Engineering Geology
STRUCTURE AND TEXTURE OF SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
• STRATIFICATION
• CEMENTING MATERIAL
• FOSSIL OCCURRENCE
• RIPPLE MARKS
• MUD CRACKS OR SUN CRACKS
• RAIN PRINTS OR MARKS
CH.Kireety Page 42
Engineering Geology
• TRACKS AND TRAILS
• PECULIAR FORMS
• CONCOIDAL FRACTURE
STRATIFICATION
• STRATIFICATION refers to the way sediment layers are stacked over each other, and can occur
on the scale of hundreds of meters, and down to sub-millimeter scale. It is a fundamental
feature of sedimentary rocks.
• Stratum- bed, strata means beds
• Stratification is also known as bedding
• When the thickness of individual beds is very thin then it is known as Lamination
• Bedding plane is the plane of contact between two adjacent beds of strata.
Cementing material
Cementation, in geology, hardening and welding of clastic sediments (those formed from pre-
existing rock fragments) by the precipitation of mineral matter in the pore spaces. It is the last
stage in the formation of a sedimentary rock. The cement forms an integral and important part
of the rock, and its precipitation affects the porosity and permeability of the rock. Many
minerals may become cements; the most common is silica (generally quartz), but calcite and
other carbonates also undergo the process, as well as iron oxides, barite, anhydrite, zeolites,
and clay minerals.
CH.Kireety Page 43
Engineering Geology
Fossil occurrence
• Fossils have been defined as “relicts and remnants of ancient plants and animals preserved
inside the rocks by natural processes”
• Remains of plants and animals, when they get buried under sediments, become fossilized.
• Not all animals and plants become fossils, only with hard parts become fossils under
favourable conditions.
Mud cracks
• Water or sea or lake, depending on different conditions covers the gently sloping sides on and
off.
• When such a wet surface is not covered, it dries up and develops vertical polygonal cracks
which are wedge-shaped downwards.
Ripple marks
• In shallow bodies, the waves and currents on the surface of water produce impressions in the
form of minor undulations on the loose and soft sediments which lie at the bottom. These are
known as ripple marks.
CH.Kireety Page 44
Engineering Geology
Rain prints or marks
• Rain prints or marks develop under the same conditions as those of mud cracks and are
preserved on surface of some rocks.
Tracks and trails
• Tracks and trails are the markings indicating the paths of some animals or organisms, over a
soft sediment, which is able to take and retain the impression.
• Footprints of animals or birds may occur the same way.
Peculiar forms
• Nodular , concretionary, pisolitic, oolitic, stalactitic.
• These forms occurs only in sedimentary rocks.
CH.Kireety Page 45
Engineering Geology
NODULAR CONCRETIONARY PISOLITIC
OOLITIC STALACTITIC
CH.Kireety Page 46
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 47
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 48
Engineering Geology
CH.Kireety Page 49
Engineering Geology
Structure of Metamorphic rocks
• Gneissose Structure
• If the rock consists of equi-dimentional
minerals along with platy and prismatic
minerals, which can easily be segregated
and altering bands are formed.
• Foliation and lineation of platy and
prismatic minerals take place.
• Such a texture or arrangement of minerals is
called Gneissose structure.
CH.Kireety Page 50
Engineering Geology
Schistose Structure
• If the rock consists of only prismatic or platy
minerals, then no segregation takes place.
• Only foliation or only lineation occurs.
• Such a texture or arrangement of minerals is
known as Schistose structure
Granulose Structure
• If the rock is composed predominantly of
equidimensional minerals, then neither
segregation nor foliation takes place,
absence of platy or prismatic minerals.
• Such a texture is called Granulose structure.
Cataclastic Structure
• It is produced under the influence of direct
pressure in the upper zones of earth’s crust.
• In some rocks, more resistant minerals may
remain unaffected, while the softer minerals
are powdered to fine material.
• This result in appearance similar to
porphyritic texture and is called
Porphyroclastic structure.
Classification of Metamorphic rocks
• Metamorphic rocks are classified as para-metamorphic or ortho-
metamorphic rocks based on whether they have been formed out
of sedimentary or igneous rocks.
• In different way, metamorphic rocks can be classified on their
physical appearance, i.e., as massive or foliated.
• This is independent of kind of metamorphism or parent rock
involved.
• However this classification reflects the mineral content and
structure clearly.
CH.Kireety Page 51
Engineering Geology
Foliated rocks
• The process of metamorphism which is accompanied by pressure, induces alignment of
constituent minerals in rock.
• The alignment or orientation of minerals takes place perpendicular to the direction of
the greatest stress.
• When platy, lamellar, bladed or flaky minerals occurs in rocks, they orient themselves
parallel to each other and obviously perpendicular to the direction of the greatest stress.
Such rocks are called as foliated rocks, the process is known as foliation.
CH.Kireety Page 52
Engineering Geology
Massive or non-foliated rocks
The three important type of rocks which come in this type of category are:
 Quartzite
 Marble
 Hornfels
Of these quartzite is formed out of thermal, dynamic or dynamo-thermal
metamorphism.
Hornfels is formed through thermal metamorphism.
Marble is a result of thermal metamorphism of limestone.
CH.Kireety Page 53
TOPIC 3
Structural Geology
• Structural geology is the study of factors such as
origin , occurrence, classification, types and effects
of various secondary structures like folds, faults,
rock cleavage and unconformities.
• All these structures are those which develop and
occur in rock after their formation and different
from those primary structures such as bedding and
vesicular structure, which develop in rocks at the
time of their formation itself.
Outcrop
• Any geological formation exposed on the surface is
called an outcrop.
• It is used as a general term to refer to exposed
folds, faults, joints, etc.
FOLDS
• Folds are one of the most common geological
structures found in rocks.
• When a set of horizontal layers are subjected to
compressive forces, the bend either upwards or
downwards.
• From civil engineering point of view, faults are the
most unfavourable and undesirable geological
structures at the site for any given purpose, i.e., for
location of reservoirs: as a foundation site for
construction of dams, important bridges or huge
buildings, for tunnelling; for laying roads or railway
tracks etc.
Note : Folds leads to form faults.
• Joints are fractures found in all type of rocks.
• They are cracks or openings formed due to various
reasons.
• The presence of joints divides the rock into a
number of parts or blocks.
EARTHQUAKES
• An earthquake may be simply described as a
sudden shaking phenomenon of the earth’s
surface for some reason or the other.
• It is also variously described as a sudden vibrating
or jerking or jolting or trembling or shivering
phenomenon of the earth’s surface.
Earthquake terminology
Classification of earthquakes
• Based on depth of their origin, earthquakes are
described as
1. SHALLOW (<60KM)
2. INTERMEDIATE (>60KM AND <300KM)
3. EXTREME DEEP (>300KM)
• Based on depth of their occurrence, earthquakes are
described as
1. Tectonic
2. Non-tectonic
Tectonic plates
• Tectonic earthquakes are exclusively due to internal
causes, i.e.., due to disturbances or adjustments of
geological formations taking place in the earth’s
interior.
• Generally these are less frequent and more
intensive and hence more destructive in nature.
• Non-Tectonic earthquakes are due to external or
surficial causes.
• These type of earthquakes are very frequent but
less destructive.
• Non-tectonic earthquakes, occur due to variety of
reasons, some of which are as follows.
1. Due to huge water falls
2. Avalanches
3. Meteorites
4. Landslides
5. Volcanic eruptions
6. Tsunamis
7. Man-made explosions
Seismic belts and shield areas
Seismic belts are those areas where earthquakes occur
frequently and shield areas are those places where
earthquakes occur either rarely or very mildly.
Earthquake waves
• Earthquake vibrations originate from focus and are
propagated in all directions.
• These vibrations through the rocks in the form of
elastic waves.
• There are three types of waves called as
1. Primary waves (P-waves)
2. Secondary waves (S-waves)
3. Love waves. (L-waves)
P-WAVES
• These are also called as primary waves, push-
pull waves, preliminary waves, longitudinal
waves
• These are the fastest waves among all the
seismic waves.
• They travel as fast as 8 to 13 Km/s.
• The P waves resemble sound waves because
these too are compressional waves in nature.
• These waves can travel through solids, semi-
liquids and gases.
S-WAVES
• These are also called as secondary waves or
traverse waves or shear waves.
• Compared to P waves, these are relatively slow.
• These can travel at a speed of 5 to 7 Km/s.
• These are like light waves.
• These waves are capable of travelling only through
solids.
L-WAVES
• These are also called as love waves or long
waves or surface waves.
• These ae the slowest among the seismic
waves.
• These can travel at a speed of 4 to 5Km/s.
• These waves are capable of travelling through
solids and liquids.
Richter scale
Effects of earthquakes
Most of the earthquakes are minor and go unnoticed.
But the major ones, though occasional, are responsible
for heavy loss of life and property.
1. Destruction of various civil engineering
constructions like dams, bridges, tunnels, roads and
railway tracks
2. Creation of irregularities and cracks in the ground.
3. Causing landslides, blocking of roads and railway
lines.
4. Changes in courses of rive due to faulting across
them.
5. Formation of new lakes, springs and water falls.
6. Submarine earthquakes causes Tsunamis
7. Heavy loss of life and property
LAND SLIDES
• If a mass of earth or rock moves along a
definite zone or surface, the failure is called a
landslide
• There are three types
1. DEBRIS SLIDES
2. ROCK SLIDES
3. ROCK FALLS
ROCK SLIDES
DEBRIS SLIDES
ROCK FALLS
TOPIC 4
• Geology of dams and reservoirs
• Geophysical investigations
GEOLOGY OF DAMS & RESERVOIRS
• Types of Dams
• Geological considerations in the selection
of dam site
• Analysis of dam failures of the past
• Factors contributing to the success of
reservoir
• Geological factors influencing water
tightness and life of reservoirs.
DAM
• A dam is a hydraulic structure of fairly impervious
material built across a river to create a reservoir on its
upstream side for impounding water for various
purposes. These purposes may be Irrigation,
Hydropower, Water-supply, Flood Control, Navigation,
Fishing and Recreation.
• Dams may be built to meet the one of the above
purposes or they may be constructed fulfilling more
than one.
• Dam can be classified as: Single-purpose and
Multipurpose Dam.
TYPES OF DAMS
Dams can be classified in number of ways. But most
usual ways of classification of dams are mentioned
below:
1. Based on the functions of dam
2. Based on structure and design
Based on the functions of Based on structure and
dam design
• Storage dam • Gravity dam
• Diversion dam • Arch dam
• Detention dam • Buttress dam
• Debris dam • Earth dam
• Coffer dam
Storage dam
These are constructed to store water during
the rainy season when there is a large flow in
the river. Many small dams impound the
spring runoff for later use in dry summers.
Storage dams may also provide a water
supply, or improved habitat for fish and
wildlife. They may store water for
hydroelectric power generation, irrigation or
for a flood control project.
Shasta dam on the Sacramento River
Bilaspur Dam, Rajasthan
Koyna Dam, Maharashtra
Mettur Dam, Tamil Nadu
Diversion dams
A diversion dam is constructed for the purpose of diverting
water of the river into an off-taking canal (or a conduit). They
provide sufficient pressure for pushing water into ditches,
canals, or other conveyance systems. Such shorter dams are
used for irrigation, and for diversion from a stream to a distant
storage reservoir.
A diversion dam is usually of low height and has a small storage
reservoir on its upstream. The diversion dam is a sort of storage
weir which also diverts water and has a small storage.
Sometimes, the terms weirs and diversion dams are used
synonymously.
Palo Verde Diversion Dam
Red Bluff Diversion Dam
Detention dams
Detention dams are constructed for flood control.
A detention dam retards the flow in the river on its
downstream during floods by storing some flood water.
Thus the effect of sudden floods is reduced to some
extent. The water retained in the reservoir is later
released gradually at a controlled rate according to the
carrying capacity of the channel downstream of the
detention dam.
Thus the area downstream of the dam is protected
against flood.
Debris dams
A debris dam is constructed to retain
debris such as sand, gravel, and drift
wood flowing in the river with water.
The water after passing over a debris
dam is relatively clear.
Coffer dams
• It is an enclosure constructed around the construction
site to exclude water so that the construction can be
done in dry.
• A cofferdam is thus a temporary dam constructed for
facilitating construction.
• A coffer dam is usually constructed on the upstream of
the main dam to divert water into a diversion tunnel
(or channel) during the construction of the dam.
• When the flow in the river during construction of the
dam is not much, the site is usually enclosed by the
coffer dam and pumped dry.
• Sometimes a coffer dam on the downstream of the
dam is also required.
Based on structure and design
GRAVITY DAM
A gravity dam is a massive sized dam fabricated
from concrete or stone masonry. They are
designed to hold back large volumes of water.
By using concrete, the weight of the dam is
actually able to resist the horizontal thrust of
water pushing against it. This is why it is called a
gravity dam. Gravity essentially holds the dam
down to the ground, stopping water from
toppling it over.
PARTS OF DAMS
EARTH DAM
An earth dam is made of earth (or soil) built up
by compacting successive layers of earth, using
the most impervious materials to form a core
and placing more permeable substances on the
upstream and downstream sides. A facing of
crushed stone prevents erosion by wind or rain,
and an ample spillway, usually of concrete,
protects against catastrophic washout should the
water overtop the dam. Earth dam resists the
forces exerted upon it mainly due to shear
strength of the soil.
ARCH DAMS
An arch dam is curved in plan, with its convexity
towards the upstream side.
An arch dam transfers the water pressure and
other forces mainly to the abutments by arch
action.
An arch dam is quite suitable for narrow
canyons with strong flanks which are capable of
resisting the thrust produced by the arch action.
BUTTRESS DAMS
• Buttress dams are of three types :
(i) Deck type,
(ii) Multiple-arch type, and
(iii) Massive-head type.
• A deck type buttress dam consists of a sloping deck
supported by buttresses.
• In a multiple-arch type buttress dam the deck slab is
replaced by horizontal arches supported by
buttresses.
• In a massive-head type buttress dam, there is no
deck slab. Instead of the deck, the upstream edges
of the buttresses are flared to form massive heads
which span the distance between the buttresses.
Geological considerations in the
selection of dam site
Careful geological studies bring out the inherent
advantages of any site selected for the dam, and it
also reduce the cost of the dam considerably.
The important geological requirements that should
be considered in the selection of a dam site are as
followed:
1. Narrow River Valley.
2. Occurrence of the bedrock at a shallow depth.
3. Competent rocks to offer a stable foundation.
4. Proper geological structures
Narrow River Valley
If the proposed site contains a narrow river valley, only a
small dam is required, which means the cost of the dam
construction is also will be less.
On the other hand if the valley is wider, construction cost
will be very high and maintenance of the dam will also be
high.
Occurrence of bed rock at shallow depths
If the dam rest on very strong and stable rocks, the stability
and safety of the dam will be very high. This also reduces
the cost of the dam. On the other hand the dam cost will
be high and the work of excavation will be overburden. This
also requires heavy concrete refilling.
Competent rocks for Safe Dam
If the dam site consists of igneous rocks, they will
offer a safe basis. If sedimentary rocks, particularly
shales, poorly cemented sandstones and cavernous
limestones, they are undesirable.
Though igneous rocks along with metamorphic
rocks occupy 95% earth crust, on the surface
igneous rocks occur only 30% and in them granites
and basalts are most common ones.
So location containing granites and basalts will be
much competent for the site of the dam.
Proper geological
structures
The Structural study gives information on the
strike and dip of the beds. It also reveals the
occurrence of geological structures like folds,
faults, joints, unconformities and foliation.
Details of these features are very important
because they have a great influence on the
suitability of site for dam.
RESERVIOR
• A reservoir usually means an enlarged natural or
artificial lake, storage pond or impoundment created
using a dam to store water.
• Reservoirs can be created by controlling a stream that
drains an existing body of water.
• They can also be constructed in river valleys using a
dam.
Capacity of the Reservoir
• Reservoir capacity depends on the existing
topography and the proposed top water level (TWL)
of the reservoir.
• Effect of Evaporation: The natural process of
evaporation reduces the quantity of water in the
reservoir. Through unwanted, this process is
unavoidable. Since reservoirs are open and extended
over larger areas. The magnitude of evaporation will
be extensive. of course, such loss shall be less if the
topography is such that a reservoir covers a small area
but has a great depth to provide adequate capacity.
Water Tightness
• When a river flows over such loose soil or fractured ground, it
is natural that some water of the river percolates (or leaks)
underground.
• Before the construction of the dam, this leakage shall be less
and limited only to the extent over which the river flow occurs.
• But when the dam is constructed, the impounding water
accumulates in large quantity in a reservoir which covers a very
large area.
• This means percolation occurs over a large area.
• Due to the height of the water in reservoir, significant
hydrostatic forces develops which will make the leakage more
effective on the sides and the floor of the reservoir.
• Thus, the extent of leakage may become alarmingly great.
Life of reservoir
•Silting
•Evaporation
GEOPHYSICAL INVESTIGATIONS
• Importance of geophysical studies
• Principles of geophysical studies by
• Magnetic method
• Electrical methods
• Seismic method
• Radio metric methods
• Geothermal methods
• Electrical resistivity methods
• Seismic refraction methods
• Improvement of competence of sites by grouting.
GEOPHYSICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Geophysics is the study of the earth by
making use of established principles of
physics.
IMPORTANCE OF GEO-PHYSICAL
INVESTIGATIONS
• To ensure safety, success and economy in
construction of major civil engineering
structures.
• It is necessary to be thoroughly aware of
geology of the concerned site.
In order to acquire subsurface details only two
approaches exist.
1. Direct observations
2. Indirect Inferences
DIRECT OBSERVATIONS
Direct observations can be made by digging,
trenching or drilling the ground.
Such process are expensive, laborious and
time consuming. But they give exact data of
the existing subsurface.
INDIRECT OBSERVATIONS
Indirect observations can be made by means of
geophysical methods of investigations.
These provide quick, inexpensive, easy and fairly reliable
means to get subsurface details.
There may a chance of getting minute errors.
CLASSIFICATION OF GEOPHYSICAL
INVESTIGATIONS
• There are many kinds of geophysical investigation.
• All of them can be classified logically into six major groups
based on the type of physical field measured or physical
property of subsurface formations which controls the
measured physical quantities.
These methods are:
1. Gravity method. 2. Magnetic method
3. Electrical method. 4. Geothermal method
5. Radiometric method.
GRAVITY METHOD
• Gravity method represents a set of
geophysical methods which make use of
the natural gravity field of the earth.
• Physical Property: Density of the materials
is the controlling property
MAGNETIC METHOD
• Like gravity methods, these investigations also
take advantage of the natural magnetic field
associated with earth and its relation to
subsurface geology
• Controlling Property: Magnetic Susceptibility
Electrical Method
Controlling properties:
1. Electrical resistivity- Electrical Method
2. Dielectric constant- Electro-magnetic
Method
3. Electrochemical activity- Electrochemical
Method
Principle:
Electrical methods are based on the fact that the subsurface
information's, structures, ore deposits, etc., posses electrical
properties. These are investigated suitably and exploited to draw the
necessary conditions.
Applications
These methods are particularly successful in
ground water exploration.
• For locating highly conductive bodies
(sulphide ore and graphite)
• Oil exploration
• Economic mineral deposit exploration
Seismic Method
Controlling property: Elastic property
differences in the rocks
Principle: Subsurface rock formations bear
different elastic properties. Because of
this, the velocities of propagation of
seismic wave velocities of rock formations
therefore provides a scope to distinguish
different subsurface lithological units.
Method
• Depending upon whether reflected waves or
refracted waves are used in the investigation, there
are two types of seismic methods, namely seismic
reflection and seismic refraction methods.
Equipment
• Geophone
• Amplifier
• Galvanometer
Radiometric Method
Controlling property: Natural radioactivity of rocks.
Principle: the nuclei of certain elements are unstable
and change spontaneously into the nuclei of other
elements.
This change is accompanied by emission of radiations
known as alpha and beta particles and gamma rays.
This phenomenon is known as radioactivity.
As it is associated with high energy , it can be
detected easily.
The gamma rays are more powerful than alpha and
beta particles are measured in the study of
radiometric methods.
Applications
• Exploration of uranium and thorium mineral deposits.
• Indirect location of some rare elements and rare earth
minerals
• Scope of location of faults, shear zones etc.,
• Exploration of oil and gas
• Ground water studies
• Radioactivity tracer techniques maybe utilized for
finding leakages in water storage and conveyance
systems
Geothermal Methods
Controlling property: thermal conductivity
Principle: temperature distribution on the surface of the
earth is due to three different sources.
i) Heat received from sun
ii) Heat conveyed from hot interior of earth
iii) Heat due to decay of radio active minerals in the earth
crust.
By applying the necessary corrections, it is possible to
eliminate the solar heat and heat contribution of
radioactive mineral decay.
When this is done, the residual values of temperature
distribution on the earths surface can be interpreted in
terms of subsurface structures, rock formations and ore
bodies.
Equipment: for measurement of the temperature on
the surface of the earth, in shallow holes or in deep
bore holes, thermistor thermometers and platinum
resistance thermometers which can achieve an
accuracy of 0.01°C are used.
Applications: oil and gas explorations, ore deposits,
ground water studies, for delineation of salt water-
fresh water interfaces, etc.
Electrical Resistivity
Methods
The electrical resistivity method is an active
geophysical method. It employs an artificial source
which is introduced into the ground though a pair of
electrodes.
Applications
• Foundation studies
• Location of suitable building material
• Ground water studies
• To determine the thickness of loose overburden or
the depth of the bedrock at the foundation site
• To know the strike and dip of the rocks
• To locate place of leakage along canals or reservoir
TUNNELS
TOPIC 5
Tunnels are underground passages or passages through hills or
mountains used for different purposes. They are made by excavation
of rock below the surface or through hills or mountains.
PURPOSES OF TUNNELING
Tunnels are made to serve some specific
purposes.
•For regular traffic and transportation of
goods
•Diversion tunnels
•Public utility tunnels
Traffic tunnels
DIVERSION TUNNELS
To construct dam, the dam
site should be dry and this is
achieved by diverting the flow
of river, dug along valley side.
Public utility tunnels
Brooklyn-to-Staten Island Drinking Water Tunnel
Sewage disposal, drinking water, oil
supplying tunnels
EFFECTS OF TUNNELING ON GROUND
• The tunneling process deteriorates the physical conditions of the
ground.
• Before tunneling the underground rocks which were under pressure
or in a state of equilibrium in terms of prevailing stress and strain of
the region. When an empty cavity is created through rocks, that
equilibrium gets disturbed and as a sequence, the rocks of the roof
may collapse.
• Stability of ground maybe jeopardized when the tunneled ground has
unfavorable ground water conditions.
• At greater depths, high temperatures will be prevailing, making
conditions for tunneling difficult. Sometimes poisonous gases may
also be encountered during excavation of tunnels.
ROLE OF GEOLOGICAL CONDITIONS IN TUNNELING
• Lithological
Structural:
• Structural
Joints, faults , folds and
• Ground water
tilted characters are the
most common structural
Lithological or rock types
features associated with
The nature of the rock
Ground water:
rocks.
types along the tunnel
Among the different
alignment is very
problems that may occur
important for safety and
in tunnels, the ground
stability of the tunnels water problem is the
most important one.
lithological
Suitability of igneous rocks:
• Massive igneous rocks ( plutonic and hypabyssal varieties)
are more competent but difficult to work.
• They do not need lining or any special maintenance.
• This is so because they are very strong , tough, hard, rigid,
durable, impervious and after tunneling they do not collapse
or bulges or any deformation.
• The volcanic rocks too in spite of their vesicular or
amygdaloidal character are competent and suitable for
tunneling.
Bhor-ghat on Bombay-Pune line of central railway about
20 tunnels were excavated through amygdaloidal basalts
Suitability of sedimentary rocks
In general sedimentary rock are less competent than igneous rocks.
Among the different sedimentary rocks the following factors are
important:
• Thick bedded, well cemented and siliceous sand stones are more
competent and better suited for tunneling
• Shales, by virtue of their inherent weakness and laminations, may get
badly shattered during blasting, but being soft they can be excavated
but, proper lining must be provided.
• Dolomitic limestones are harder and more durable. But, in general
limestones are unsuitable for tunneling.
Himalayan Ram-Ganga Diversion tunnel-poorly cemented
sandstone formation, which softened with water, had
caused roof fall extending about 6 m above top of tunnel
Suitability of metamorphic rocks
• Gneisses are nearly similar to granites in terms of their
competence, durability and workability.
• They are capable of withstanding the tunneling process
without lining.
• Quartzite are very hard and hence very difficult to work.
They are more brittle too. They are competent and need no
lining.
• Marbles are reasonably competent by virtue of their high
compactness and granulose structure.
• Slates are soft, hence they are weak and require lining.
Importance of geological structures
• The bearing of structures in tunnels is very important for two
different reasons
i) They modify the competency and suitability of rocks for tunneling
ii) They may create or prevent ground water problems. Which are of
critical importance in tunneling.
Effects of joints at the tunnel site
• In igneous rocks , which are exceptionally strong the presence of
suitably placed joints may be advantageous in the excavation process.
Further their presence may not harm their self supporting character.
• Closely spaced joints may lead to over break.
• Due too joints ground water problem may arise.
Effects of faults at the tunnel site
• Dislocation and discontinuity in the tunnel alignment is caused.
• If the occur along the course of a tunnel, it becomes necessary to
provide lining.
• Being highly porous, permeable and decomposed, are the potential
zones to create ground water problems.
Effects of folds at the tunnel site
• When excavations for tunnels are made in folded rocks, such rocks get
the opportunity to release strain, such release may occur in the form
of rock bursts or falls.
OVER BREAK
Excavations though hard rocks necessarily involves the
removal of some of the rocks outside the proposed
perimeter of the tunnel.
The quantity of rock broken and removed, in excess of what
is required by the perimeter of the proposed tunnel, is
known as overbreak.
LINING
Tunnels in loose rock and soft soils are liable to
disintegrate and, therefore, a lining is provided to
strengthen their sides and roofs so as to prevent them
from collapsing.
The objectives of a lining are as follows:
• Strengthening the sides and roofs to withstand pressure and prevent
the tunnel from collapsing.
• Providing the correct shape and cross section to the tunnel.
• Checking the leakage of water from the sides and the top.
• Binding loose rock and providing stability to the tunnel.
• Reducing the maintenance cost of the tunnel.