STUDENT GUIDE
GEOLOGICAL ENGINEERING
University of British Columbia
2021-2022
Introduction
The purpose of this guide is to give you information about the structure and course requirements in
the Geological Engineering program. You should use this guide to help you plan your degree
program. However, as our program evolves, curriculum changes will be made and this guide may
become outdated. The official program is the one posted online in the UBC Calendar, which can be
accessed here through the link below:
2021 - 2022 Geological Engineering entry in the UBC Calendar.
Our program is structured to include a set of core course requirements that all students must fulfill
to graduate. In addition, there are a number of electives that allow you to tailor the program to your
individual interests. This guide will help you select those electives. For additional information, you
can also consult the Geological Engineering website: http://www.geoeng.ubc.ca/.
Covid-19
Based on current guidance from provincial and regional public health authorities, UBC is planning
for a return to on-campus activity for Winter Session, Term 1, in September. At present, this means
that all courses and labs will be delivered in person and not online.
For additional updates regarding UBC’s Covid-19 planning and response, click here.
Administrative Structure of the Program
Geological Engineering is an interdisciplinary program that is housed in the Department of Earth,
Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, but is under the jurisdiction of the Faculty of Applied Science
with oversight provided by the Geological Engineering Board of Study. The undergraduate program
leads to a BASc or "Engineering" degree. This degree can be obtained with or without participation
in the Co-op program. All graduates from the program will receive the designation “BASc in
Geological Engineering” on their degree, and are eligible for registering as a P.Eng. after meeting
the professional experience, law and ethics requirements set out by the governing body in the
jurisdiction you wish to register in (e.g. Engineers and Geoscientists British Columbia).
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
Getting Help
Degree Navigator
There are several sources of help and advising for the program. Degree Navigator is an easy to use
tool that will allow you to track your program, the course requirements you have fulfilled, and those
still required for graduation. Details on how to use Degree Navigator can be found at:
http://students.engineering.ubc.ca/how-use-degree-navigator. Tip: When using Degree Navigator,
choose “Audit – UBC Report” as the view to visualize your degree in. Remember, Degree Navigator
is a tool and not the official record of whether you have fulfilled your degree requirements. It is
generally correct but might not be programmed for every option, for example, when it comes to
acceptable technical electives. If you have any questions regarding your Degree Navigator, please
contact the Director of Geological Engineering (see Advising).
Course Registration – Standard Time Tables (STT)
Most students will register through a Standard Time Table (STT) that allows automatic registration
in several core courses organized so that the times for lectures and labs are free of scheduling
conflicts. However, please note that not all core courses are included in the STT and students should
make sure that there are not other required courses that they still need to register for separately. For
example, EOSC 213, MATH 253 and STAT 251 are all core to the 2nd year program but are not
included in the STT. Students must register for these separately. You can click here for the complete
list of courses required for your year.
Also note that registering for a STT assumes that the student has all prerequisites for the courses
listed in the STT. Students should check this if they haven’t completed all core courses from the
previous year. If you have any questions regarding your Degree Navigator, please contact the
Director of Geological Engineering (see Advising).
Course Registration – Individual Courses/Non-STT
For students who need to register for non-STT courses, for example technical electives, or
because they are not eligible for a STT, course registration must be carried out through the
host department offering the course. The following are the procedures for the courses most
common to the Geological Engineering program:
EOSC courses: Please contact our Senior Program Assistant, the kind and most helpful
Ian Ayeras (iayeras@eoas.ubc.ca, 604-822-3146, ESB 2020).
CIVL courses: Please complete the Civil Engineering online course request form:
https://www.civil.ubc.ca/webform/course-request-registration-form
Note that Civil generally does not process requests for Technical Electives
until they have finished registering those involving core/required courses.
This might not be until one or two weeks before the start of term. Further
information can be found on their FAQ (click here).
2
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
MINE courses: Please contact the Mining main office: https://mining.ubc.ca/contact/
Complementary These are a special category of courses that are Canadian Engineering
Studies courses: Accreditation Board requirements that are common to all engineering
programs. They include the “Humanities and Social Sciences Electives”
and the “Impact of Engineering on Society, Sustainability and
Environmental Stewardship” elective. Requests for course eligibility that
differ from those provided on the Engineering Academic Services website
(click here) should be directed to Engineering Academic Services.
First Year The 1st-year program falls under the jurisdiction of Engineering Academic
requirements Services. For any 1st-year courses that still need to be completed or are not
courses: appearing correctly in Degree Navigator, please contact Engineering
Academic Services.
Advising:
For questions regarding the program, advising, or approval of courses and technical electives, please
contact the Director of Geological Engineering, Prof. Erik Eberhardt (erik@eoas.ubc.ca). You
can also drop by his office at: EOS-South 251.
For questions related to transfer credits, yet-to-be-completed first year requirements or program
requirements listed as “complementary studies” electives, contact Engineering Academic Services
in the lobby of the Kaiser Building (https://academicservices.engineering.ubc.ca/).
For questions related to Co-Op, Go Global, Coordinated International Exchange, etc., contact the
respective offices for these.
For the student perspective on courses and other student experiences, talk to senior GeoRox
students in the program. They are a great resource!
Program Requirements
We are always looking for ways to improve the Geological Engineering program, resulting in
periodic changes to the courses needed to fulfill the degree requirements. This can sometimes get a
bit confusing in years where new requirements have been introduced. The rule is that you must
complete the 2nd, 3rd or 4th year of your program as it appears in that year’s UBC Calendar when you
received standing for the year you are in. For example, if you receive 3rd year standing in 2021/22,
you must complete the 3rd year program as it appears in the 2021/22 calendar. If you received 3rd
year standing in 2020/21 but are completing part of 3rd year in 2021/22 (for example due to Co-Op
or Exchange), you must complete your 3rd year program as it appeared in the 2020/21 calendar.
Your Degree Navigator should be programmed for this and is a useful tool to help you track which
courses you need to complete. However, errors do sometimes occur in Degree Navigator and the
official record of what courses you need to complete is the UBC Calendar. Click here to access
UBC’s archive of past calendars. If you have any questions regarding this, or would like permission
3
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
to substitute an older program requirement with a newer option, please contact the Director of
Geological Engineering (see Advising).
Note: The last major change to the Geological Engineering program was in 2018/19 when CIVL
231 was dropped from 2nd year and the credit load for 4th year was reduced from 42 to 39 credits.
Students who entered the program in 2018 or later should not be affected by these changes. Students
who entered the program before 2018 and still require CIVL 231 should contact the Geological
Engineering Program Director
Field Schools and Time Tabling
There are two field-school course requirements in the program: EOSC 223 Field Techniques, and
one of either EOSC 328 Field Geology or EOSC 428 Field Techniques in Groundwater Hydrology.
These field schools run after final exams in April. Note that if you need to take a field school at the
end of your fourth year, grades will be provided in time for spring convocation.
Tailoring the Program to Your Interests
The graduation requirements for the program are provided in the UBC Calendar as well in your
Degree Navigator. These are produced at the end of the Student Guide in Table 1 for 2021/22. If
there are any discrepancies, please note that the online UBC Calendar is the official record of the
courses required for completing the program relative to the year you receive standing in each year
of your program (see note above on Program Requirements). As you will see, in second year all
courses are core and there are no technical electives. The second year courses serve as the foundation
for your third and fourth year courses. In third and fourth year you can select from a wider range of
courses and technical electives.
It is by choosing your electives that you can tailor the program to your interests. In Table 2 at the
end of this document we have provided a list of pre-approved technical elective courses.
Note that this pre-approval only applies to the course qualifying as an acceptable technical elective;
course registration is at the discretion of the host department offering the course and is subject to
the course not being full or that you meet any prerequisites. To register for an elective you are
unable to register for yourself, please see instructions above under Course Registration – Individual
Courses/Non-STT. Note that some instructors are willing to waive prerequisites for students outside
the department offering the course if the student has an equivalent course from their program of
study. However, this is at the discretion of the instructor.
Also note that the list in Table 2 is not comprehensive and there may be new courses or other courses
you are interested in that are equally acceptable. Please seek the formal approval of the Geological
Engineering Director via email before you enroll in a technical elective course if it is not listed here,
to ensure that it meets program requirements.
4
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
Example Program Streams
You will graduate as a Geological Engineer as long as you satisfy the requirements of the program
as outlined in the UBC calendar. As a guide to help you specialize, we describe three areas of interest
in Geological Engineering: i) Geotechnical, ii) Environmental, and iii) Natural Resources. You
may choose to follow one of these, or to mix and match courses to sample a little from each.
Geotechnical interest:
Broadly speaking, this is the application of engineering and geological understanding to the needs
of civil, mining, and energy projects (site investigations, engineering design, project planning,
construction, environmental protection, etc.). Technical electives you will want to consider include
those that provide additional soil and rock mechanics (e.g., MINE 403), geological field mapping
skills (e.g., EOSC 328 instead of EOSC 428), and specifics regarding geotechnical practice in
different industrial settings (e.g., block cave mining via MINE 485 or mine waste management via
MINE 455). You will gain skills relevant to the design of foundations, tunnels, hydroelectric dams,
open pit and underground mines, natural hazard mitigation works, environmental protection works,
highway/railway/pipeline routes, slope stabilization, forestry, and many other important projects.
You will be able to find employment in consulting companies, construction, mining and energy
production firms, as well as government. These jobs seek to balance the needs of society while
working to ensure public safety and minimizing impacts on the environment.
Environmental interest:
An essential component of engineering design is recognizing and mitigating/minimizing the impacts
that engineering projects can have on the natural environment. The technical electives you will want
to consider for this specialization are similar to those for Geotechnical interest; the two are closely
related and are equally important for careers in Geological Engineering. However, to specialize more
you may want to consider additional courses related hydrogeochemistry and groundwater
remediation (e.g., EOSC 430, 431), hydrogeological field investigations (e.g., EOSC 428 instead of
EOSC 328), water resource engineering (e.g., CIVL 415, 416), and the design of landfills and
environmental cleanup (e.g., CIVL 405, 406, 408). Your employment prospects will also be similar
to those of your Geotechnical focused colleagues, including consulting and mining/energy
companies who have specialized environmental groups.
Natural Resources interest:
This area of interest trains Professional Engineers for work in the mineral exploration or energy
development industries. You will still obtain the same engineering skills to allow you to work in
functions described under Geotechnical and Environmental interests, but you will focus more on
geology and mineral deposits (e.g., EOSC 331, 424), and geological mapping (e.g., EOSC 328
instead of EOSC 428). You will be able to find employment with companies involved directly in
resource exploration, development and production, or with companies providing services such as
mineral resource consulting.
Mix and Match interest:
If your interests are broad and you would like exposure in two or all three areas, you can mix and
match electives as your interests dictate.
5
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
Degree Planning & Degree Navigator
Table 1 below, is the program curriculum for 2021/22 (as outlined in the UBC Calendar). Where
possible, we have tried to avoid course conflicts, particularly with core courses. However, as our
program contains courses from many departments, it is impossible to ensure that all elective courses
will fit into your schedule. We therefore encourage you to look at 3rd and 4th year courses together,
and plan your electives far in advance so that you acquire the proper prerequisites for the electives
you are most interested in. You may also find it easier to take a fourth year course in third year so
that you can fit a technical elective into your timetable in fourth year.
Remember: It is your responsibility to check that your program can be completed according to
your preferred time for graduation. It is also your responsibility to check that your courses will fit
together into a credible time table and that you will have the required pre-requisites for courses that
you want to take in the future. If you have any questions, please contact the Geological Engineering
Director to arrange a meeting.
Hint #1: Make a list of courses you wish to take, and then check the course schedules. You will see
right away where potential conflicts with lecture times and labs occur. Then, check that all your pre-
requisites are okay.
Hint #2: Make sure to check out Degree Navigator. Degree Navigator is an interactive advising
tool designed to help you make informed decisions regarding your academic program. It will show
the courses you have taken and the courses and degree requirements you still need to take.
Technical Electives
There are two types of technical electives: i) constrained electives where you must choose a course
from a set list of courses, and ii) unconstrained technical electives where you are free to choose
any approved course that’s related to Geological Engineering (in the broadest sense). Most of the
electives in the Geological Engineering Program are unconstrained to give you maximum flexibility
to tailor your program towards your interests. In the case of your “Earth Sciences Technical
Elective” in third year, you are free to choose any 300/400 level science course offered in the
Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences; EOSC courses offered to Art’s students
might not be eligible. Courses that are not eligible will state this in the calendar course description.
In Table 2, you will find a list of some of the courses that have been pre-approved as unconstrained
technical electives. Note constrained technical electives may also be used to satisfy an unconstrained
technical elective requirement. For example, in 3rd year you have the following constrained elective:
Select one of: EOSC 328 (Field Geology) (3)
EOSC 428 (Field Techniques in Groundwater Hydrology) (3)
You may select EOSC 328 to satisfy this constrained elective and then choose EOSC 428 to satisfy
an unconstrained technical elective (or alternatively, your 300/400 level Earth Sciences Technical
Elective).
6
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
Note 1: Technical electives MUST be 300 or 400 level courses. 100 and 200 level courses are not
eligible as technical electives.
Note 2: The course level of the technical electives DO NOT have to match your standing or year
relative to the program requirements listed in the UBC Calendar. For example, the technical
electives requirement listed under the 3rd year program do not need to be restricted to 300 level
courses, and those listed under the 4th year program do not need to be restricted to 400 level courses.
In both cases, you may take any approved 300/400 level technical to meet either the 3rd or 4th year
technical electives requirements.
Complementary Studies
Complementary Studies are a special set of unconstrained electives that are required for all Applied
Science students. A set of minimum requirements are identified related to “Professional
Development”, “Communications”, “Impact of Technology on Society”, “Engineering Economics”
and “Humanities and Social Sciences”. Students are referred to the Engineering Academic Services
website for a listing of eligible courses to meet these requirement:
https://academicservices.engineering.ubc.ca/degree-planning/course-planning/
Engineering Design Project
All students with fourth year standing will be required to take EOSC 445 Engineering Design
Project. This two-term course is our capstone design experience and will involve team work, design,
analysis, and communication (presentation and report writing). EOSC 445 complements three other
design-focused courses: EOSC 433 Geological Engineering Practice I Rock Engineering; EOSC
434 Geological Engineering Practice II Soil Engineering; and EOSC 429 Groundwater
Contamination.
Because EOSC 445 is a 6 credit course that spans both Term 1 and 2, it MUST be taken
consecutively in the same school year; students should not plan a co-op work term or international
exchange in their final year when they would be taking this course.
Applied Science Co-Op
Co-Op offers an excellent opportunity to gain some valuable practical experience. Approximately
40% of Geological Engineering students take the Co-Op option. In most years, the job market for
Geological Engineering is relatively strong. However, all engineering disciplines can experience
difficulties in finding work placements when the B.C. or Canadian economy is down. Remember,
Co-Op is not a job placement service. It has also been our experience that students receive better
work experiences by going through Co-Op than seeking their own summer jobs. This is of course
your choice. However, many of the companies that hire preferentially from our program state that
they can give a student a richer work experience when it involves an 8-month Co-Op placement
compared to a 4-month summer job.
7
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
The 3rd year of the Geological Engineering Program is designed to be especially flexible to facilitate
Co-Op experiences. For Co-Op, students have the option of a 16-month continuous work period
(divided between two different company placements), or a combination of shorter 8- and 4-month
placements to meet the minimum Co-Op requirements. Common schedules include:
Schedule A FALL (Sept – Dec) WINTER (Jan – April) SUMMER (May – Aug)
YEAR 2 study study work‐term 1
YEAR 3 work‐term 2 work‐term 3 work‐term 4
YEAR 4 study study work‐term 5
YEAR 5 study study graduation
Schedule B FALL (Sept – Dec) WINTER (Jan – April) SUMMER (May – Aug)
YEAR 2 study study work‐term 1
YEAR 3 study study work‐term 2
YEAR 4 work‐term 3 work‐term 4 work‐term 5
YEAR 5 study study graduation
Alternative 1 FALL (Sept – Dec) WINTER (Jan – April) SUMMER (May – Aug)
YEAR 2 study study work‐term 1
YEAR 3 study work‐term 2 work‐term 3
YEAR 4 work‐term 4 study work‐term 5
YEAR 5 study study graduation
Alternative 2 FALL (Sept – Dec) WINTER (Jan – April) SUMMER (May – Aug)
YEAR 2 study study work‐term 1
YEAR 3 work‐term 2 study work‐term 3
YEAR 4 study work‐term 4 work‐term 5
YEAR 5 study study graduation
Geological Engineering students interested in Co-Op can find more information, including
application requirements and procedures, through the Applied Science Co-Op website.
Coordinated International Experience and International Exchange
The 3rd year of the Geological Engineering Program is designed to be especially flexible to facilitate
an international exchange experience. Term 2 of 3rd year only has two core courses and the
remaining courses are technical electives. This makes taking an international exchange straight
forward, whether through the Applied Science Coordinated International Experience (CIE) or
UBC’s GoGlobal. Both work best when you take courses at the host university to meet your
unconstrained technical elective requirements.
8
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
Table 1. Geological Engineering Curriculum
The Geological Engineering Program for each year as they appear in the 2021/22 UBC Calendar:
2nd Year
Code Course Name Credits
APSC 201 Technical Communication 3
CIVL 210 Soil Mechanics I 4
CIVL 215 Fluid Mechanics I 4
CIVL 230 Solid Mechanics 4
EOSC 210 Earth Science for Engineers 3
EOSC 213 Computational Methods in Geological Engineering 3
EOSC 220 Introductory Mineralogy 3
EOSC 221 Introductory Petrology 3
EOSC 223* Field Techniques 3
EOSC 240 Site Investigation 3
MATH 253 Multivariable Calculus 3
STAT 251 Elementary Statistics 3
Total Credits 39
* Includes one-week field school at the end of Term 2.
3rd Year
Code Course Name Credits
CIVL 311 Soil Mechanics II 4
CIVL 316 Hydrology and Open Channel Flow 4
EOSC 323 Structural Geology I 3
EOSC 329 Groundwater Hydrology 3
EOSC 330 Principles of Geomorphology 3
EOSC 350 Environmental, Geotechnical, and Exploration Geophysics I 3
MINE 303 Rock Mechanics Fundamentals 4
Select one of:
EOSC 328* Field Geology
3
EOSC 428* Field Techniques in Groundwater Hydrology
Earth Sciences Technical Elective:
300/400 EOSC course from EOAS 3
Complementary Studies:
Impact of Engineering on Society, Sustainability and Environment 3
Humanities 3
Unconstrained Technical Electives:
Any 300/400 courses relevant to Geological Engineering 6
Total Credits 42
* Taught at the end of Term 2 after final exams.
9
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
4th Year
Code Course Name Credits
CIVL 402 Professionalism and Law in Civil Engineering 3
CIVL 410 Foundation Engineering I 3
CIVL 411 Foundation Engineering II 3
EOSC 429 Groundwater Contamination 3
EOSC 433 Geological Engineering Practice I - Rock Engineering 3
EOSC 434 Geological Engineering Practice II - Soil Engineering 3
EOSC 445 Engineering Design Project 6
Select one of (Engineering Economics):
CIVL 403, MINE 396, CHBE 459, MECH 431, MTRL 455, 3
ELEC 481, CPEN 481
Unconstrained Technical Electives:
Any 300/400 course relevant to Geological Engineering 12
Total Credits 39
Table 2. List of Pre-Approved Technical Electives
Note: The courses listed here are “pre‐approved” with respect to qualifying as being eligible to be
counted towards the technical elective requirements in Geological Engineering. Approval to
register for these classes is at the discretion of the host department who may need to limit
numbers due to classroom size. It is also your responsibility to check that you have the necessary
pre‐requisites for the courses listed here. In some cases, professors may be willing to waive the
pre‐requisites, but you will need to check with them or through their department to make this
request. Also note that not all classes are taught every year. Please consult the UBC Calendar to
confirm which classes are being offered in the current year.
S = Summer Term 1, 2
W = Winter Term 1, 2
APSC 402 Living Language: Science and Society W 1
461 Global Engineering Leadership S 1
462 Global Engineering Leadership Practicum S 2
CIVL 305 Introduction to Environmental Engineering Applications W 2
315 Fluid Mechanics II (4 credits) W 1
320 Civil Engineering Materials W 1
340 Transportation Engineering I W 2
406 Water Treatment and Waste Management W 1
10
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
407 Environmental Laboratory Analysis W 1
408 Geo‐Environmental Engineering W 2
413 Design of Earth Dams and Containment Structures W 2
415 Water Resource Engineering W 2
416 Environmental Hydraulics W 1
417 Coastal Engineering W 1
418 Engineering Hydrology W 1
EOSC 320 Sedimentology W 2
321 Igneous Petrology W 1
322 Metamorphic Petrology W 2
326 Earth and Life Through Time W1 or S1
331 Introduction to Mineral Deposits W 1
332 Tectonic Evolution of North America W 2
340 Global Climate Change W1 or W2
352 Geophysical Continuum Dynamics W 2
353 Seismology W 2
410 Geoscientific Data Analysis and Empirical Modelling W 1
420 Volcanology W 1
421 Advanced Sedimentology W 1
422 Structural Geology II W 2
424 Advanced Mineral Deposits W 2
430 Aqueous Geochemistry W 1
431 Groundwater Remediation W 2
442 Climate Measurement and Analysis (1 credit) W1 or W2
454 Applied Geophysics W 2
FRST 385 Watershed Hydrology W 1
443 Remote Sensing for Ecosystem Management W 2
GEOG 310 Environment and Sustainability W1 W2 S1
312 Climate Change: Science and Society W 2
314 Analysing Environmental Problems W 2
316 Geography of Natural Hazards W 1
318 Sustainability in a Changing Environment W2 or S1
319 Environmental Impact Assessment W 1
410 Environment and Society W1 W2 S2
412 Water Management: Theory, Policy, and Practice W1 or W2
497 The Arctic W 1
GEOS 305 Introduction to Hydrology W 2
11
Geological Engineering Program Guide 2021 – 2022
308 Quaternary and Applied Geomorphology W 1
309 Geographical Sciences Field Course W 2
370 Advanced Geographic Information Science W1 or W2
373 Introductory Remote Sensing W 2
405 Fluvial Geomorphology W 2
406 Watershed Geomorphology W 1
408 The Changing Cryosphere W 2
IGEN 450 Pipeline Engineering W 1
451 Pipeline Systems and Infrastructure W 2
MINE 302 Underground Mining and Design (4 credits) W 2
304 Rock Fragmentation W 2
310 Surface Mining and Design (4 credits) W 1
380 Mine Waste Management W 2
395 Mineral Deposit Modeling W 1
403 Rock Mechanics Design W 2
406 Mine Project Valuation and Risk Assessment W 2
420 Applied Geostatistics W 2
455 Mine Water Management W 2
470 Indigenous Peoples and Mining in Canada W 1
480 Mine Waste Management W 2
485 Cave Mining Systems: Design and Planning W 2
486 Mining and the Environment W 2
12