GEOLOGY FOR CIVIL
ENGINEERING
Dr. Ayfer ÖZDEMİR
ayferozdemir@ormansu.gov.tr
ozdemir.ayfer@gmail.com
Today: Course Overview
 A few ground rules…
 Stuff about me.
 Why are we here?
 Course exams & grading.
 Prelude: What is Geology?
 Read the textbook
Ketin İ., Genel Jeoloji Yerbilimlerine Giriş, İTÜ Vakfı Yayınları, 2016.
Önalp A., Sert S., Geoteknik Bilgisi, Birsen Yayınevi, 2016.
S
E
Tarbuck, EJ and Lutgens, FK, Earth Science, Prentice Hall, 2011.
L
Cazeau C.J. and Hatchar R.D., Physical Geology: Principles, processes, and problems, New
U
York: Harper & Row, 1976.
R
Alan E. Kehew, Geology for Engineers and Environmental Scientists, Prentice Hall, 3rd ed.,
2006
D
N
 Attend lectures
U
- Hear topical overviews & ask questions
O
- Do in-class assignments & turn in & pick up HW
R
- Exams, quizzes & extra credit opportunities
G
In-class exercises and homework assignments (depend on your
status!!!)
- Exercises weekly & homework every other week
Required by all students:
S While in lecture, please DO NOT:
E
L  Forget to turn off cell phones
U
R  read different documents instead of course notes
D
 Talk and have conversations
N
U
 Sleep uncontrollably, endangering yourself and others
O
R
G
Required by all students:
S
E
While in the lecture, please DO
:
L
U
 Ask questions when anything is not clear
R
 Engage in the discussions
D
N
 Fully participate in in-class exercises
U
O
 Geology is great! Have fun with it!
R
G
E
R
E
H Since you will be Civil Engineer, you should learn basics of
geology
E
R
You need a science credit to graduate
A
Just curious, it seemed like it might be cool
U
O
You have absolutely no idea
Y
Y
H
W
 Graduate from Department of Geological Engineering (2003)
 Research assistant (2006-2011)
E
 Geological Engineer (2011-2012) DSI
M
 Geological Engineer (2012-…)The Ministry of Forestry and Water
Affairs
T
 Phd and section manager of Modelling department
U
 Research Areas
O
Geology
B
Petroleum reservoir geology
A
GIS and remote sensing
Hydrology
Groundwater
Water resources modelling
G
N
Geology Exams:
I
D
A 1. There will be two Exams.
R -In class, 1-hour, 100 points each
-One midterm, one final
G
2. Review outline
&
-Will be handed out before exams
-Will provide a list of topics that will be covered
S
M 3. Final Exam
-Covers last section of course, but all exams
A
may call on basic concepts presented earlier.
X
E
G
N
I
D MAKE-UP EXAMS
A
There are none! Exceptions include a health problem.
R
G
TERM PAPER OPTION
&
 It is optional, not decided yet
S
M
A
X
E
Course catalog says:
S
L
Basic principles of geology, geochemistry, and
A
O geophysics. Rocks, minerals, weathering, earthquakes,
G mountain building, volcanoes, water, and glaciers.
But also, we have these goals:

To develop critical thinking skills & a basic

understanding of how the science works
S
L
A Become familiar with some of the observational

methods, reasoning processes and analytical tools used
O
by geologists to understand the Earth and its history
G
Learn the basic scientific concepts and principles of

Earth sciences.
You will be learning a new language!
S
L
A Geology is a broad, interdisciplinary science with a rich vocabulary. The
O terminology we will use throughout this course will require that you learn
a new language.
G
Geology: The study of the Earth and its systems
You are here!
A Prelude:
 Geology; Physics, chemistry, mathematics, zoology, botany, construction,
mining and other engineering.
 Geology «The history of the earth, its combination of rock, soil and water,
and the science of studying evolution»
 Geological Engineering: Provides the use of geological data for practical
engineering purposes.
And just what is Geology?
The relationship between Geological Engineering and
other engineering sciences
 Civil Engineering (safe and economical
construction of buildings)
 Mining Engineering (safety and economical factors
in mining deposition operating and development)
 Petroleum Engineering (Economic design for
extracting petroleum and obtaining petroleum
products)
 Geophysical Engineering (earth physical
propersties and its engineering applications)
 Architecture (project designing)
 City and Regional Planners
Geology Branches
 General geology  Ore deposits-Geochemistry
 Mineral deposits
 Structural geology
 Geochemistry
 Sedimantology-Sedimentary petrography
 Petroleum Geology
 Stratigraphy
 Applied Geology
 Mineralogy-Petrography
 Engineering Geology
 Mineralogy
 Hidrogeology
 Petrography
 Mathematical Geology
The world's origin and geological processes
Mineral types, rocks and rock formations, distribution and characteristics
internal and external geological processes that affect the properties of earth materials
Geological structures
Surface and groundwater movements and related properties
Deformation types and structural properties, geological time concept
Use of topographical-geological maps
The basic concepts of engineering geology
How old is the world and how did it?
Layers of the earth
How continents are formed?
How the mountains are formed and eroded?
Geology and Civil Engineering Relationship
Civil engineering works are carried out either on site or within the site.
For this reason, erosional and geological process which cause the stability of the rocks
and ground and their changes are important for civil engineering
Geology and Civil Engineering Relationship
Geology and Civil Engineering Relationship
 Where is a geologically safe and economical engineering structure built?
 How to choose the communication and transport infrastructure route where geological
conditions are convenient?
 How are the building bases constructed safely and economically in terms of geological and
geotechnical aspects?
 How to create a slope both safely and economically?
 How is a safe tunnel and underground facility excavation done?
 How is location geological materials required for construction of dams and road construction
determined?
 What are the measurements and application methods for improvements of ground conditions
and controlling instability, infiltration etc.?
 What are required geological and geotechnical conditions store urban, toxic and radioactive
waste?
 How are to identify, prevent or reduce geological hazards identified, prevented anf reduced?
Time…
Geology deals with complex historical systems
that have evolved and changed over time.
Time is thus a fundamental variable in geology.
Coupled processes, operating over time produce
all that we see.
Various Projects
Various Projects
2. Week
Nature of scientific inquiry
Basic Concepts:

Scientific method

Observation

Hypothesis

Test

Scientific “certainty”

Paradigms and the nature of scientific revolutions

Theory
Nature of scientific inquiry
Science is based on:
 assumption that the natural world behaves in a consistent & predictable
manner
Goals of science:
 understand underlying patterns in nature (from careful
observations/measurements form hypotheses that lead to predictions
Nature of scientific inquiry
Four basic steps:
1) collect the facts (observation/measurement)
2) develop hypothesis (one or more)
3) test hypothesis
4) accept/modify/reject
Nature of scientific inquiry
Process begins with Observation!
Formulation of Hypotheses:
Construction of a tentative (untested) explanation for something observed
Value of multiple working hypotheses
Testing hypotheses
Evaluate explanatory power.
Certainty in science and the nature of scientific proof
Science has been described as the orderly accumulation of rejected
hypotheses.
Nature of scientific inquiry
Theory
 well-tested/widely accepted hypothesis that “acceptably” predicts
observed facts.
 also: explains additional observations not used originally to form
theory
• predictive power
• still testable and subject to disproof!
Geology: The study of the Earth and its systems
You are here!
Layers of EARTH
Prelude: Earth Systems

Atmosphere

Hydrosphere

Cryosphere

Solid Earth

Biosphere
Atmosphere
Blanket of gases surrounding the Earth
 Protection from Sun’s heat & UV rays
 Weather: due to exchange of energy
 between Earth’s surface & atmospher
 between atmosph. & outer space
 Strongly interacts water/ surface
Hydrosphere
Water portion of Earth
 Oceans (most prominent)
71% of surface of Earth
 Streams, lakes, glaciers, underground water
 Atmosphere
Cryosphere
Icy portion of Earth’s crust
 Glaciers
 Permafrost and ground ice
 Polar ice caps
 Frozen polar seas
Biosphere
Earth’s Ecosystems
 Earth’s surface and subsurface to depths of a few
kilometers
 Life occupies an extreme range of environments
 Life strongly interacts with the atmosphere, the
hydrosphere and the solid earth (these interactions
are called ecology!)
Prelude: Earth’s internal structure
3 distinct divisions:
crust
Oceanic 0-6 km (“young”, < 180 m.y.)
Continental 0-34 km (older, up to 3.8 b.y.)
mantle Upper 34-670 km
Lower 670-2900 km
Outer – Liquid
core
Inner – Solid
Earth’s internal structure
Continental crust – Underlies the
continents.
 Avg. rock density about 2.7 g/cm3.
 Avg. thickness 35-40 km.
 Felsic composition. Avg. rock type = Granite
Oceanic crust – Underlies the ocean
basins.
 Density about 3.0 g/cm3.
 Avg. thickness 7-10 km.
 Mafic composition
 Avg. rock type =Basalt/Gabbro
Crust ve Earth’s internal structure
Plate tectonics
• Plate tectonics, theory dealing with the dynamics of Earth’s outer shell, the lithosphere,
that revolutionized Earth sciences by providing a uniform context for understanding
mountain-building processes, volcanoes, and earthquakes, as well as understanding the
evolution of Earth’s surface and reconstructing its past continental and oceanic
configurations.
• Describing in detail the processes that make up the Earth's fundamental surface
features, «The definition of lithospheric separation of rigid plates moving on the
asthenosphere» (Alfred Wegener 1915) forms the basis of the plate tectonics theory.
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Data indicates that Plates seperate from each other
• Coastal forms and continents match each other
• Similarity of sediment deposits; The continuation of the vegetation
and geological structure of Africa, India, Australia, Madagascar, South
America which make up Gondwana,
• Similarity of mountain ranges; When the continents are brought side
by side, the mountain lines form a single continuous mountain line in
the same age and deformation style.
• The glaciation that began in Gondwana was also experienced at the
same time (carboniferous) by parts seperated from Gondwana
• The remains of the reptile family which is impossible to swim the
ocean were found only in South West Africa and Brazil
• Palaeomagnetism
• Propagation of the sea floor
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Convergent plate boundaries
 Subduction event occurs
 Colliding with Oceanic/oceanic or oceanic/continental plate
generated a deep ocean trenches
 Crust melting and magma genaration occur
 Volcanism and volcanic island arcs occur, volcanic island arcs
arranged like a barrier can form inner seas between
continents and the oceans
 Events of metamorphism occur
 Two continental or continental and an oceanic plate collides
to form a curved mountain line
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics
Events happening in places where plates are moving away
from each other :
 Mid-ocean ridge (2500 m high ridge in the Atlantic Ocean)
 Volcanic islands
 New crust formation
 Basaltic lavas are solidified and added to the continental
margins, The ocean floor expands and the continents
move away from each other
 Magma is emerged from the fractures genarated by
divergent event and volcanic events ocur
 Best example of that is Atlas Ocean
Plate tectonics
• Transform Plate Boundaries are locations where two plates
slide past one another.
• The fracture zone that forms a transform plate boundary is
known as a transform fault.
• Most transform faults are found in the ocean basin and
connect offsets in the mid-ocean ridges.
• A smaller number connect mid-ocean ridges and
subduction zones.
• The most famous example of this is the San Andreas Fault
Zone of western North America.
• Another example of a transform boundary on land is the
Alpine Fault of New Zealand.
Plate tectonics
The most common areas of tectonic earthquakes in
the world are:
• Great Oceanic boulders (Pacific waters): Kamchatka
in the east of Asia, Japan, the Philippines,
Indonesia, the Aleut Islands in the west of America,
California, Mexico, Chile, Peru.
• Mediterranean Himalayan Belts: Spain, Italy, North
Africa, Yugoslavia, Greece, Turkey, Iran, India,
Pakistan, Afghanistan, East Indian islands.
• Central part of Atlantic Ocean: Asor Islands and
Iceland Island
Plate tectonics
• The least common areas of tectonic earthquakes in the world are:
The Western of Australian,
The Eastern of USA and Canada
Iceland of N.West European-Grönland, İskandinav peninsula,
Eastern Europe • Northern of Asia
Sourthern and Middlest of Africa
Geologic Time…
Millions years
A few seconds.
Geologic Time…
Washington May 17, 1980 September 10, 1980
3. WEEK
MINERALS AND ROCKS GROUPS WHICH GENERATES
EARTH CRUST
EARTH CRUST
 Average depth of the earth crust thickness is
8-10 km.
 There are two different rocks which have
different chemical and biological content.
 Sial; average density: 2.7 gr/cm2
(granite, sandstone and limestone)
 Sima; 2,8-3 gr/cm3
(bazalt type rocks)
 The sial layer in the ocean floor is almost
absent.
 Sima reaches 8-10 km thickness.
MATERIALS WHICH GENERATES THE CRUST
• Eight of the 108 elements found on the Earth's Oxygen %46.6
surface are very common.
Silisium %27.72
• The 8 most common elements in the crust form
98.59% by weight of the ground shell. Aluminum %8.13
• The remaining 98 elements constitute 1.4% by Iron %5
weight of the earth's crust.
Calcium %3.63
Sodium %2.83
Potassium %2.59
Magnesium %2.09
MINERALS
More than 2000 minerals on Earth generates rocks, rocks
constitutes the crust.
It is found naturally
Has chemical composition(element or compound form).
It can be expressed by a specific crystal system.
It is mostly solid, liquid (mercury and water)
Generally inorganic, at least organic compounds.
The Importance of Minerals
• Minerals and mines are part of the legacy that remains to us from the geological past. These are the basic
building blocks of the solid part of the earth and are very important for construction geology;
• The minerals and rocks are the main sources for the production of automobiles, computers and many other
things we use,
• Minerals and rocks play an important role in many earth processes such as landslides, coastal erosion and
volcanic activity,
• Studies on minerals and rocks provide important information on earth history,
• Knowing process properties of the minerals and rocks provides to how the mechanisms in the earth and to
understand how we can best manage the our earth resources
CRYSTAL SHAPES OF MINERALS
CRYSTAL SHAPES OF MINERALS
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF MINERALS
The main physical properties of minerals;
 Tenacity,
 Hardness,
 Fracture,
 Cleavage,
 Streak,
 Luster,
 Density
Tenacity
• The property of tenacity describes the behavior of a mineral under deformation. It describes the
physical reaction of a mineral to externally applied stresses such as crushing, cutting, bending, and
striking forces. Adjectives used to characterize various types of mineral tenacity include 'brittle,'
'flexible,' 'elastic,' 'malleable,' 'ductile,' and 'sectile'
Mica (turns back to its original state when twisted), Chlorite (remains twisted)
• When the hammer hit some minerals can become extended or plate.
Gold, silver, copper.
Tenacity
• Brittle - Breaks or powders easily.
• Malleable - can be hammered into thin sheets.
• Sectile - can be cut into thin shavings with a knife.
• Ductile - bends easily and does not return to its original shape.
• Flexible - bends somewhat and does not return to its original shape.
• Elastic - bends but does return to its original shape.
Tenacity
Most mineral species are brittle, and will crumble or fracture under pressure or upon
the application of a blow. Such materials break or powder easily.
Antimony and quartz etc.
Hardness
Hardness has traditionally been defined as the level of difficulty with
which a smooth surface of a mineral specimen may be scratched.
The hardness of a mineral species is dependent upon the strength of the
bonds which compose its crystal structure.
Hardness is a property characteristic to each mineral species and can be
very useful in identification.
Hardness
• Hardness minerals are resistance to scratching.
• It is the result of the cohesion between these molecules.
• It is determined with the aid Mohs hardness scale formed by mineral
hardness.
Hardness
Cleavaga
• A cleavage plane is a plane of structural weakness
along which a mineral is likely to split smoothly.
• Cleavage thus refers to the splitting of a crystal
between two parallel atomic planes.
• Despite the fact that every mineral belongs to a
specified crystal system, not every mineral exhibits
cleavage.
• Cleavage planes, if they exist, are always parallel to a
potential crystal face. However, such planes are not
necessarily parallel to the faces which the crystal
actually displays. Fluorite, for example, has
octahedral cleavage yet forms cubic crystals.
• Nonetheless, the property of cleavage, if it is
present, can offer important information about the
symmetry and inner structure of a crystal.
Fracture
If the mineral contains no planes of weakness, it will break along random
directions called fracture. Several different kinds of fracture patterns are
observed.
• Conchoidal fracture - breaks along smooth curved surfaces.
• Fibrous and splintery - similar to the way wood breaks.
• Hackly - jagged fractures with sharp edges.
• Uneven or Irregular - rough irregular surfaces
Colour
• Color is sometimes an extremely diagnostic property of a mineral, for
example olivine and epidote are almost always green in color.
• But, for some minerals it is not at all diagnostic because minerals can take
on a variety of colors. These minerals are said to be allochromatic. For
example quartz can be clear, white, black, pink, blue, or purple.
Streak
Streak is the color produced by a fine powder of the mineral when scratched
on a streak plate. Often it is different than the color of the mineral in non-
powdered form
Hematite: red; Limonite: brown; Magnetite: dark gray; Chromite: brown;
Magnetite: dark gray; Chromite: brown
Luster
Luster refers to the general appearance of a mineral surface to reflected light. Two general
types of luster are designated as follows:
• Metallic - looks shiny like a metal. Usually opaque and gives black or dark colored streak.
• Non-metallic - Non metallic lusters are referred to as
vitreous - looks glassy - examples: clear quartz, tourmaline
resinous - looks resinous - examples: sphalerite, sulfur.
pearly - iridescent pearl-like - example: apophyllite.
greasy - appears to be covered with a thin layer of oil - example: nepheline.
silky - looks fibrous. - examples - some gypsum, serpentine, malachite.
adamantine - brilliant luster like diamond.
Structure
Kidney, chordal, chordal radial, concussion, lump and concentric.
•Kidney : Chalcedon, hematite
•Chordal: Asbestos, gypsum, calcite,
•Radial: Antimuan,
•Chordal radial: Pyrite, barite
•Concussion: Calcite, agate, pyrite, agate,
•Lump: Flintstone
•Concentric: Agat, Calcedon
Specific Gravity
• Density refers to the mass per unit volume.
• Specific Gravity is the relative density, (weight of substance divided
by the weight of an equal volume of water).
• In cgs units density is grams per cm3, and since water has a density of
1 g/cm3, specific gravity would have the same numerical value has
density, but no units (units would cancel).
• Specific gravity is often a very diagnostic property for those minerals
that have high specific gravities.
• In general, if a mineral has higher atomic number cations it has a
higher specific gravity.
Specific Gravity
Atomic # of
Mineral Composition Specific Gravity
Cation
Aragonite CaCO 40.08 2.94
3
Strontianite SrCO 87.82 3.78
3
Witherite BaCO 137.34 4.31
3
Cerussite PbCO 207.19 6.58
3
Specific Gravity
Mineral Composition Specific Gravity
Graphite C 2.23
Specific gravity can usually be
Quartz SiO 2.65
qualitatively measured by the heft of a 2
Feldspars (K,Na)AlSi O 2.6 - 2.75
mineral, in other words those with high 3 8
Fluorite CaF 3.18
specific gravities usually feel heavier. 2
Topaz Al SiO (F,OH) 3.53
2 4 2
Corundum Al O 4.02
Most common silicate minerals have a 2 3
Barite BaSO 4.45
specific gravity between about 2.5 and 4
Pyrite FeS 5.02
3.0. These would feel light compared to 2
Galena PbS 7.5
minerals with high specific gravities
Cinnabar HgS 8.1
Copper Cu 8.9
Silver Ag 10.5
Radioactivity
The radioactivity in the minerals comes from the uranium (U) and
thorium (Th) found in them. Some elements such as potassium (K) and
rubidium (Rb) also have a small amount of radioactivity.
It is aimed to determine the geological age by making use of the
radioactivity feature in minerals.
Chemical properties of the minerals
• Minerals have a special composition
• It is determined by qualitative and quantitative analyzes and indicated by
related formulas.
• The same chemical composition, a different crystal system polymorphism
(multidimensionality) is used.
• Calcite with aragonite and diamond with graphite are polymorph minerals.
• If minerals have the same shape but they have different chemical
composition, isomorphism (coordination) is used.
• Calcite (CaCO3) dolomite (CaCO3.MgCO3) and siderite (FeCO3) are isomorphic
minerals.
Optical properties of the minerals
• The light-related properties of the minerals make up the optical properties of minerals. Optical propeties of
the minerals provides colours, fracture properties, single and double breaking properties, and the shapes
they show under a polarizing microscope.
• Apart from these properties of minerals, some minerals have their own unique characteristics. Some
minerals are magnetic, some minerals are radioactive, some minerals are good conductors, and some
minerals are poor conductors. Some minerals have piozoelectric properteis. Industy benefits from these
properties of the minerals.
THE IMPORTANCE OF MINERALS FOR CIVIL
ENGINEERING
• Many minerals are used as building materials in the construction industry.
• The concrete is generally obtained with a mixture of gravel, sand, cement and
water
• Aggregate (aggregate): sand, gravel, crushed stone (blasted rock), slag (slag) as
concrete (concrete) course used for the construction or artificial or both types
often broken in various sizes up to 10cm or broken granular material stack (sand +
gravel + natural rock material consisting of crushed stone).
• Gypsum (gypsum); (CaSO4.2H2O-Mohs hardness 2); colorless or white color is
converted into plaster losing some of the water at 120 ° C. Plaster is used in
indoor and outdoor applications.
• Various clay minerals have been used in mud bricks, bricks, tiles since ancient
times.
THE IMPORTANCE OF MINERALS FOR CIVIL
ENGINEERING
• Pale limestone which is white or black without include silisium and clay is
used for making lime
• Lime is used as a binder in mortar and also in stabilization of roads.
• Limes which are found various colour and pattern and well polished are used as
coating materials in the buildings
• Apart from this, the mechanical behavior of the clays directly reflects on
the structures and causes the forces to deform the structures.
THE IMPORTANCE OF MINERALS FOR CIVIL
ENGINEERING
• Feldspar and feldspathoids, which are found in the composition of many
masses, can be very dangerous for engineering because they are
decomposed by environmental factors.
• The behaviors of fully matured clay minerals vary with increasing water uptake rate
and progressive dissociation time.
• Therefore, if feldspars are encountered in the basement, applications are carried
out, ranging from project changes to new measures to extend the construction time.
• In such cases, a series of precautions are taken, such as removal of the dissimilar
part, placement of the foundation in a firm-to-undeformed section, selection of the
concrete quality with the appropriate foundation system and construction of a good
drainage network.
THE IMPORTANCE OF MINERALS FOR CIVIL
ENGINEERING
•The concrete is generally obtained with a mixture of gravel, sand, cement and water depending on the
importance and size of the engineering structure to be built, the chemistry of each of these components
forming concrete may be primary importance.
•Especially aggregate (sand-gravel) which is added to concrete and constitutes 75-85% by weight of concrete
is either naturally extracted from the earth's crust or artificially broken by rock masses.
•If quartz sand and pebbles are to be used as aggregates in a dam body concrete, they must be well studied.
•The high alkaline cement in the concrete is affected by the hydration caused by the hardening of the
concrete and the alkali such as sodium-potassium in the cement are released.
•Quartz, opal, chalcedony, agate, tridimite sand and gravel composed of siliceous minerals and silicates
interact with the alkalis released in the concrete, cause expansion, cracking and fracturing of the concrete.
•This results in concrete can be easily damaged by being non-resistant against external influences. The volume
percentages of the silica minerals constituting the aggregate component in the concrete are as follows; Opal
0,20%; Calcinedon 5%; Acid volcanic mass% 3
The main minerals found in the rocks
The rocks are mineral assemblages; either by the combination of various
minerals or pieces of stone, or by the accumulation of a large number of single
minerals.
Main minerals: Mass forming and called minerals play a role in their
nomenclature. A number of them are 20 to 30.
Quartz, feldspar, nepheline, olivine etc. They play a role in the name of
this rock minerals.
Accessory minerals: tourmaline, magnetite, zircon, etc. There are also minerals
that rarely enter into the masses and have no effect on their naming.
Secondary minerals: New minerals that have formed as a result of various
environmental factors of the existing main minerals, mostly due to the effects of
decomposition, metamorphism and melt, and their composition.
Kaolin, serpentine, chlorite, zeolite etc.
The main minerals found in the rocks
Main minerals in Magmatic rocks;
• Quartz
• Feldspar: Orthoclase, Plagioclase
• Feldspathoid: leucite, nepheline; Sodalite
• Pyroxene: Bronzeite, Enstatite, Hipersten,
Augite, Diyalage, Deiodopsite
• Amphibole: Hornblend
• Mica: Biotite, Muscovite
• Perido: Olivin
Main minerals in sedimentary rocks
• Magmatic rock fragments (especially quartz and feldspar)
• Clay minerals
• Calcite, Dolomite
• Siderite
• Limonite
Main minerals in metamorphic rocks
• Quartz
• Feldspar
• Biotite, Muscovite
• Hornblend
• Epidote
• Garnet
• Silimanite
• Andalusite
• Calcite
• Serpentine
• Talc
• Chlorite
Secondary minerals
• The most important ones are Tourmaline, Magnetite, Ilmenite, Rutil,
Apatite, Zircon and Topaz.
Quartz Group
• It is found in Magmatic, metamorphic and sedimentary masses.
• Crystal system Hexagonal,
• Density is 2.65 and hardness is 7.
• Usually colorless and transparent.
• Other elements that come into crystal structure can offer different colors. In this case, it gets
different names. Some contain liquid or gaseous inclusions.
• Quartz has not cleavage.
• It offers its own unique twinning.
• The face of the fracture is concoidal, glassy and oily.
• It is not affected from acids apart from florur.
• Quartz which is pure and clean is used in optical and chemical industry and ceramic industry
• Bright and colorful varieties (Necefaşı, Amethist, Sitrin, Agat, etc.) are used in making ornaments.
Quartz Group
• There are many types of quartz. The most important ones are;
Chalcedony; chrysoprase; Heliotrop; Agate; Flintstone; Jasper; Silicified
Tree; Opal;
• If quartz sand and gravel are to be used as building material, it is necessary to
carry out the analyzes thoroughly.
• When the quartz and its species used as aggregates in cement start to harden
with high alkali cement, hydro treatment occurs and Na, K etc. The alkalies are
released.
• All silicates, especially opal, chalcedony and agate, and siliceous minerals act
with alkalis, causing the concrete material to expand, crack, break down and
eventually reduce its strength.
• Therefore, cement-aggregate reactions become important according to the size
and importance of the structure to be constructed.
Quartz Group
Feldspars
• They form 40-50% of the earth's crust, their composition is potassium-
sodium-calcium aluminum silicate.
• The crystal system is Monoclinal or Triclinal.
• There are cleavages in two directions and by the angle between the
cleavage planes;
1. orthoclases
2. Plagioclase
Feldspars
Ortoklas Group; Cleavage angles are 90 feldspar. They are crystallized in
the monoclinal system. Orthotic mineral is important in this group.
Plajioklas Group; the angles of cleavage of feldspar is 86,80.
This group of minerals;
Albite and Anorthite consist of a mixture of different proportions.
They are crystallized in the triclinal system. Colors are variable. The
fracture faces are glassy.
• Their hardness is 6-6,5 and their specific weights are 2,60-2,76. They
are found in different proportions in the composition of Magmatic
stones and play an important role in naming these rocks.
• It is also found in metamorphic and sedimentary rocks.
Feldspars
• Nomenclature is based on the percentage of Na and Ca in the
compositions. The main minerals of this group are;
1. Albite (NaOAl2O3), (90-100% Albite + 0-10% Anorthite)
Oligoclas
3. Andesine (50% Albite + 50% Anorthite)
4. Labrador
5. Bitovnit
6. Anorthite (CaOAl2O32SiO2), (90-100 Anorthite + 0-10% Albite)
Decomposition of feldspar;
 As a result of the decomposition events, quartz occurs with clay minerals that are soluble in water.
 Factors affecting decomposition; Climate, temperature, humidity, the effect of superficial acid waters and
fumerols or hydrothermal processes which are deeply magic.
 The shape and depth of the variable increase in volume is the result of decomposition of 5-30%.
 The carrying capacity of the decomposition mass and pressure resistance are reduced. When building on
such masses, it is necessary to pay attention to disintegration events.
Kaolenization-argillisation
4. WEEK
Rock forming minerals
Oxygen %46.6
• Rocks is assemblies of minerals, it is Silisium %27.72
formed by various minerals or rock
fragments come together or consists of Aluminum %8.13
a large number of accumulations of a
Iron %5
single mineral.
Calcium %3.63
• It is found in the majority of 8 element
minerals as rock builder, representing Sodium %2.83
more than 98% of the weight of the
Potassium %2.59
continental crust.
Magnesium %2.09
The rocks that make up the Earth's crust are the
various minerals or single minerals, rock fragments,
or both mineral and rock fragments.
For example, Magmatic rocks such as granite,
gabbro, syenite are formed by minerals; marble,
quartzite is formed by a single mineral; various
types of sandstones and conglomerates are formed
by rocks and minerals.
The rocks are studied according to their formation
conditions and their origins;
•Magmatic rocks;
•Sedimentary rocks;
•Metamorphic rocks;
Rock forming minerals
Rock Cycle
Magmatic Rocks
• If the hot and fluid melt "magma" found in the depths of the earth is
cooled or crystallized, it is called as "Magmatic rocks"
• Magma contains O, Si, Al, Fe, Ca, Mg, Na, K together with water, other
rare earth elements as well as CO2, SO2 in vapor form.
Magmatic Rock Forming Minerals
• Main minerals; Quartz, feldspar (orthoclase, plagioclase), nepheline,
sodalite, leucite, mica, muscovite, biotite, pyroxene, amphibole
olivine.
• Accessory minerals; Zircon, sifen, magnetite, ilmenite, hematite,
apatite, pyrite, rutile, corundum, garnet.
Acidic (felsic) if it contains 65% silica and a large amount of aluminum, sodium, potassium
and a small amount of calcium, iron and magnesium;
Neutral (intermediate) if it contains 52-65% silica;
It is possible to call it basic (mafic) component magma if it contains more than 45-52% of
silica, calcium, iron and magnesium.
• The basic magma often reflects the composition of the mantle source area.
• The oceanic crust is a basic compound and richer in Fe and Mg elements.
Therefore oceanic crust is more intense than the continental crust and the
asthenosphere directly owned properties hosting site.
• The continental crust, on the other hand, consists of minerals rich in silicon
and aluminum. While the magma that passes through the continental
crust, it takes the material from the crust in its place. As a result of this, its
composition returns from basic to neutral and acidic composition.
Therefore, magmatic rock in the continental crust is richer and less
intensive in terms of SiO2 mineral.
Magmatic rocks
The change in the amount of SiO2 in the bodies of magmatic rocks
causes significant changes in the color of the rocks.
The minerals and rocks rich in basic iron and nickel elements are darker,
while minerals and rock which is acidic in nature and the richer in
SiO2 are lighter.
Magmatic rocks
• The composition of the magmatic rock
develops depending on the composition of the
last melt crystallized the rock.
• If the melt is poorly silicic, the rocks consist poorly
siliceous and richly dark ferromagnesite minerals,
they are formed by dark colored rocks in the melt.
For example, Gabro
• If the ratio of silica is high, quartz crystals are
formed because the rocks are rich in silica and they
have so less dark colored minerals
• All of the magmatic rocks such as peridotite can be
composed of ferromagnesian (dark colored)
minerals. The composition of these rocks is not the
same as the composition of the melt.
Magmatic rocks
• The magma, which is hot and fluid, moves in different depths under
different composition and pressure.
• Plutonic rocks are formed underground. They involve the "intrusion"
or insertion of magma between other rocks, which then cools below
the surface.
• Volcanic rocks are formed above ground. They involve the
"extrusion" or eruption of magma, which then is called "lava." The
lava cools upon or very close to the surface. Volcanic rocks can also
form from "ash", which is simply pulverized rock blown into the air
(not like the "ash" that results from burning wood) -- larger rocks are
"bombs.
Magmatik kayaçlar
Magmatic rocks
• Intrusive rocks;
• They are sturdy and durable (because they are made of crystal only)
Granite, syenite
• Extrusive rocks;
• It is semi-crystalline and the crystals are floating in a dough
Andesite, rhyolite, basalt
• Semi-deep rocks;
• They form a transition between the depth rocks and the surface rocks.
• The slurry is not glassy, and other rocks are composed of small crystals
in cracks and crevices are located.
Granitporphyr, quartosporphyr, syenitporphyr
Magmatic rocks
• Plutonic rocks; crystallize below Earth's surface, and the slow cooling
that occurs there allows large crystals to form. Examples of intrusive
igneous rocks are diorite, gabbro, granite, pegmatite, and peridotite.
• After occurring solidifies dozens or even hundreds over the years up
to millions continental uplift as a result of erosion of sediments that
can reach several kilometers thick on them as a result of wear of such
rocks are seen today on the ground surface in the current topography.
• Çavuşbaşı granodiorite pluton on the Anatolian side of Istanbul and granite
pluton of Gebze-Sancaktepe.
Magmatic rocks
• Semi-deep rocks; Magmatic rocks are called semi-deep rocks as the
magmatic rocks which eventually solidify on the earth in the course of
upward movement following the discontinuities such as cracks and
cracks in the upper part of the lithosphere.
• Intrusive rocks consist of coarse, very coarse grains of crystals that
develop due to slow cooling and less pressure in spaces and cracks at
depths near the earth. Granite pegmatite, gabbro pegmatite, etc.
named.
Magmatic rocks
Commonly observed forms of intrusive
rocks observed in the field are: dykes, sills,
laccoliths, bysmaliths, phacoliths, lopolith,
volcanic necks, batholiths and chonoliths.
Magmatic rocks
DYKES: Dykes and sills are the most common forms of the intrusive
Magmatic bodies.
• They are discordant
• Cut across the bedding of the rocks in which they intrude
• Vertical to steeply inclined and sheet like body (extensive in
lateral dimension)
• Thickness vary widely from an inch up to hundred of feet
• Injected through fractures, joints, and weak planes
• Quartz-Dolerite dykes of Midland valley of Scotland are about 50-60 km long and up to
30m thick. Few places some dykes are very short up to few meters and as thin as few
cm.
Mafic
dyke
SILLS: Sills are relatively thin tabular sheet like body that penetrates parallel to the
bedding planes.
• Laterally it may extends for 100s of km and up to 10 km in width.
• Lateral extend mainly depends on the hydrostatic force, temperature, degree of
fluidity or viscosity, weight of overlying sediment column.
• Since basic magma are more fluid then acidic magma- mostly sills are made up of
gabros, dolorites and basalts
Spreads parallel to the bedding
limeston
planes of the rocks, hence
e
concordant in nature.
sandston
e
mudston
e
LACCOLITHS: It is a concordant body, with flat bottom and convex upward. It is dome
shaped.
When viscous magma is injected rapidly
along the bedding, as it cannot spreads it
pushes up the overlying layers and keep
on piling up.
It causes folding of the overlying rock
layers.
BATHOLITHS: are the largest kind of plutons, irregular in shape and occupies large area.
• Their side sloping away from each other which makes them larger and large downwards extending
to greater depth
• Their occurrence is commonly associated with the mountain-building process
• These are either granites or granodiorites in composition
Stocks:
Are smaller irregular
bodies with 10 km in maximum
dimension, and are associated
with batholiths.
PHACOLITHS: These are concordant bodies that occurs along the crests and troughs of
the folded sedimentary strata.
LOPOLITHS: These are basin or saucer-shaped concordant bodies with top nearly flat and
convex bottom.
They are very huge body with diameter up to 150 miles (app. 240 km)
Lopolith
Magmatic rocks
• Extrusive Magmatic rocks are rocks formed by cooling magma lavas
near a surface with a chimney or by moving to the surface. The
crystals are small because they cool quickly. They usually form a small
crystalline matrix (porphyric texture) surrounding large crystals. In
general, except for special conditions, the crystals are coarse grained
rocks and the differences are fine-grained or glassy. For example
when granite rocks from the depths to the surface through cracks
reaches, rhyolites, diorites: andesite-dacite; Syenite: trachyte;
Gabbro: basalt; Peridotite is called picrite. When the lavas cool very
rapidly on the surface, there is no crystallization and the resulting
texture is glassy.
Magmatic rocks
• Melt state magma can rise to the surface of the earth's crust cracks
and crevices. Volcanic rocks form from magma emerging from the
earth. The magma, which is fluid when it reaches the earth, solidifies
after a while. Solidified magma is called "lava". Because the lava
suddenly cool down, they show glassy texture. The volcanic material
can sometimes rise to the earth as a solid. The grain size of the solid
material changes. Classification according to grain size;
• Block or volcano bomb larger than 32 mm,
• lapilli those between 4-32 mm,
• volcano ash in between 0.25-4 mm
• Those larger than 0.25 mm are also called dust.
Magmatik kayaçlar
Structure and texture of igneous rocks
• Structure: The natural architectural features of a rock mass seen on
the ground in large scale. Here, the physical appearance of the rock
mass determines character of the rock-forming mineral assemblages
and plays an important role in shaping the rock mass structure. Faults
are taken into account in the concept of platoon structure in joints,
folds, flow or sedimentary rocks.
Structure and texture of igneous rocks
• Texture; The geometry and appearance of the minerals of the rocks, including
the appearance, size, shape and arrangement of the rocks forming the rock,
including their size, shape and sequence under a hand sample or microscope.
• The texture of Magmatic rocks depends on the conditions of the environment,
such as magma or lava cooling rate, pressure and temperature, and slow
cooling usually causes deep crystals to form at depths of the earth, and this
texture is called fanaritic texture. The texture of minerals is visible in all
plutonic rocks. In surface rocks, very fine grained texture, which is formed by
rapid cooling on the surface and near the surface, can be seen only by
magnification. Large grain crystals and the texture formed by the small
crystals surrounding them are also called porphyric texture.
Structure and texture of igneous rocks
• In Magmatic rocks, they are classified according to their crystallization
grades (whole or semi-crystalline, all glass), crystal sizes (phaneretic,
afanatic), grain sizes in relation to each other (granular and porphyric
texture) and their relations with each other (panidiomorphic and
hidiomorphic).
• The textures of Magmatic rocks play a major role in determining the
physical and mechanical properties of Magmatic rocks, mineral
species, mineral sizes, dissociation states. These qualities play an
important role in the use of Magmatic rocks as construction or
building materials.
• Textures by crystallization degree
• Holocristalline (all crystalline) texture
• Hypocrystalline texture (semicrystalline)
• Holohyalin (crystalline / vitreous) texture
• Textures according to the crystal size
• Afaneritic(<1 mm)
• Faneritic (distinguishable by 5mm-1mm)
• Pegmatitic (very coarse> 5 mm)
• Porfiric (two-phase)
• Textures according to the crystal forms
• Diamorph (self-shaping)
• Hypidiomorph (partially self-shaped)
• Csnomorph (self-formed)
Textures by crystallization degree
Holocristalline (all crystalline) texture
Hypocrystalline tissue (semicrystalline)
Holohyalin (crystalline / vitreous) tissue
Textures according to the crystal size
Afanitic (The particles are invisible <1 mm)
Faneritic (distinguishable by 5mm-1mm)
Pegmatitic (very coarse> 5 mm)
Porifric (two-phase)
FaneriticGranodiorite
Textures according to the crystal forms
diamorph (self-shaping)
Hypidiomorph (partially self-shaped)
Csnomorph (self-formed)
Magmatik Kayaçların yapı ve dokuları
The Importance of Magmatic Rocks in Engineering
• Plutonic rocks often become resistant to breakage and pressure when
they are fresh and although the rock is fractured. Therefore they
show high resistance.
• They can be used in material engineering services when their
resistance is between 1500-2000 kg / cm2.
The Importance of Magmatic Rocks in Engineering
• The resistance of the rock depends on weathering and hence
degradation degree will vary inversely with the degree of weathering.
• Since the volcanic masses have different physical properties, it is
necessary to thoroughly inspect them before construction starts.
• Some lavas, agglomerates and volcanic rocks protect their freshness,
so their resistance may be as high as deep rocks such as basalt. But
volcanic tuffs and breccias are hollow and decayed, so they show a
drossy structure. At the same time they lose credibility because they
show clay mineralization.
Metamorphic Rocks
Any rock (igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic) can become a

metamorphic rock. If rocks are buried deep in the Earth at high
temperatures and pressures, they form new minerals and textures all
without melting. If melting occurs, magma is formed, starting the rock
cycle all over again.
Rocks that form when a pre-existing rock (protolith) changes due to
temperature or pressure, and/or as a result of squashing or shearing.
Metamorphism doesn’t include weathering, diagenesis, and melting. It is
a solid-state process.
Metamorphic Rocks
• Metamorphism progresses incrementally from low grade to high-grade
• During metamorphism (transformation) the rock remains essentially solid
• Metamorphism characterized by
• Growth of new minerals from pre-existing minerals through recrystallization
• Deformation of existing minerals
• Change in shape
• Change in orientation
• Metamorphic settings
Metamorphic Rocks
• Metamorphic rocks occur because of changes that are caused by high
temperatures (above 600 C) and high pressures (500 Mpa) (20 km
deep).
• Metamorphic rock type is depended on parent rocks (pre-existing
rocks), the process through which a rock’s structure is changed by heat
and pressure
• Parent rocks can be Igneous, sedimentary, or other metamorphic rocks.
• Most of the metamorphic changes begin at depths of a few miles of the
earth, continuing up to the upper mantle depths with rising
temperature and pressure.
metamorphic rocks: controlling factors
• parent rock composition (also called protolith)
• temperature and pressure during metamorphism
• tectonic forces
• fluids
parent rock composition
no new material is added to rock during metamorphism
metamorphic rock will have similar composition to parent rock
if parent material contains only one mineral
resultant metamorphic rock will only have one mineral
--mineral will be recrystallized (texture changes)--
Limestone
Marble
if parent material contains many minerals…
…old minerals will recombine to form new minerals
clay, quartz, mica, and volcanic fragments in a sandstone
will combine to form new metamorphic minerals
example is garnet: which grows during metamorphism
QuickTime™ and a
TIFF (Uncompressed) decompressor
are needed to see this picture.
garnet growing garnet schist (metamorphic rock)
temperature during metamorphism
• heat from Earth’s deep interior
• all minerals stable over finite temperature range
• higher temperatures than range cause melting
(and therefore generates igneous rocks)
heat is essential
think about mixing flour, yeast, water, salt….
….nothing happens until they have a heat source
and then they make bread
pressure during metamorphism
pressure in the Earth acts the same in all directions
pressure is proportional
to depth in the Earth
pressure increases
increases at ~1 kilobar
with depth
per 3.3 km
volume decreases
with depth
look at example with deep water
consequence on cube is squeezing
into smaller cube
--grains pack together--
high pressure minerals: more compact and dense
tectonic forces - driven by plate motion!
lead to forces that are not equal in all directions (differential stress)
compressive stress (hands squeeze together)
causes flattening at 90° to stress
shearing (hands rubbing together)
causes flattening parallel to stress
flattened pebbles in metamorphic rock
fluids
• hot water (water vapor) most important
• heat causes unstable minerals to release water
• water reacts with surrounding rocks
and transports dissolved material and ions
time
• metamorphism may take millions of years
• longer times allow new minerals to grow larger
--coarser grained rocks
types of metamorphism
• Contact or thermal metamorphism
Driven by a rise in temperature within the host rock
• Regional metamorphism
Occurs during mountain building
Produces the greatest volume of metamorphic rock
• Burial metamorphism
Occurs at bottom of thick sedimentary rock piles
• Hydrothermal metamorphism
chemical alterations from hot, ion-rich water
• Others
Contact metamorphism
• Occurs due to a rise in temperature when magma invades a host rock
• A zone of metamorphism forms in the rock surrounding the magma
• Most easily recognized when it occurs at the surface, or in a near-surface
environment
types of metamorphism
contact metamorphism • occurs adjacent to magma bodies intruding
cooler country rock -- “contact”
• produces non-foliated metamorphic rocks
• happens in a narrow zone of contact
(~1 to 100 m wide) known as aureole
• forms fine-grained (e.g. hornfels) or
coarse-grained (e.g. marble) rocks
types of metamorphism
regional metamorphism
• occurs over wide region and mostly in
deformed mountain ranges
• produces foliated metamorphic rocks
• happens at high pressures and over a range
of temperature
• increases in pressures and temperatures
forms rocks of higher metamorphic grade
Burial metamorphism
• Associated with very thick sedimentary strata
• Required depth varies from one location to another
• depending on the prevailing geothermal gradient
hydrothermal alteration along mid-ocean ridge
Other types of metamorphism
• Hydrothermal metamorphism
Chemical alteration caused when hot, ion-rich
fluids, called hydrothermal solutions, circulate
through fissures and cracks that develop in rock
Most widespread along the axis of the mid-
ocean ridge system
cold sea water encounters hot basalt,
forms steam, alters minerals
other types of metamorphism (less common)
partial melting during metamorphism
• produces migmatites, which have both intrusive
and metamorphic textures
shock metamorphism
• occurs during impact events
• yields very high pressures
• forms “shocked” rocks around impact craters
plate tectonics and metamorphism
regional metamorphism associated with convergent boundaries
 pressure increases with depth
 temperature varies laterally
 different P, T conditions yield
different degrees of metamorphism
temperatures cooler in down-going (subducting) plate
(dashed purple line is isotherm -- line of equal T)
Metamorphic rock systematics
Metamorphic rocks are classified on
the basis of
 texture and
 composition (either mineralogical
or chemical)
Scheme for Metamorphic Rock Identification
Texture Composition Type of Comment Rock Name
Metamorphism
Regional Low-Grade
metamorphism of Slate
Mica
SHALE
T
D L N Mica, Quartz, Foliation surfaces shiny
E A E
Feldspar, from microscopic mica
R M Phyllite
T
E Amphiboles, Garnet crystals
N
A N (Heat and
G
I I Pressure
L M I Mica, Quartz,
L
increase w/
O A Feldspar, Platy mica crystals
depth) Schist
F Amphiboles, Garnet,
visible
Pyroxene
- Mica, Quartz, Compact, may split
D
G
N N Feldspar, easily Gneiss
A Amphiboles, Garnet,
I
B
Pyroxene
Scheme for Metamorphic Rock Identification
Texture Composition Type of Comment Rock Name
Metamorphism
Various rocks changed
Contact by nearby magma/lava Hornfels
Variable
(Heat)
D
E Metamorphism of
T
Quartz Quartz Sandstone Quartzite
Regional
A
I
L
O (Heat Metamorphism of
F Calcite and/or & Limestone or Marble
N Dolomite Dolostone
Pressure)
O
N Pebbles may be
Various minerals in distorted or stretched
Metaconglomerate
particles and matrix
Progression of Metamorphism
Start with a shale and then hit
it with heat and pressure!
Rock Name Rock Type Grade of
Metamorphism
More Shale Sedimentary -----
Heat
Slate Metamorphic Low
&
Pressure Phyllite Metamorphic Low/Intermediate
Schist Metamorphic Intermediate/High
Gneiss Metamorphic High
Molten Rock Cools into -----
Igneous Rock
Shale
(Sedimentary Rock)
Heat
Slate
&
(Metamorphic Rock)
Pressure
Slate
(Metamorphic Rock)
Heat
Phyllite
&
Pressure (Metamorphic Rock)
Phyllite
(Metamorphic Rock)
Heat
Schist
&
Pressure (Metamorphic Rock)
With even more heat & pressure
(High-Grade Metamorphism)
… you end up with something
that is really Gneiss!
Metamorphic Textures
Texture refers to the size, shape, and arrangement of
grains within a rock
1. Foliated Rock  Bands of minerals in parallel layers
Foliation – any planar arrangement of mineral grains or structural
features within a rock
Parallel alignment of platy and/or elongated minerals
Foliation can form through:
 Rotation of platy and/or elongated minerals
 Recrystallization of minerals in the direction of preferred orientation
 Changing the shape of equidimensional grains into elongated shapes
that are aligned
2. Non-foliated Rock  Without bands
Metamorphic rocks that lack foliation are referred to as
nonfoliated
Develop in environments where stress (deformation) is minimal
Typically composed of minerals that exhibit equidimensional
crystals
Metamorphic Textures
Foliation: The structure is called as foliation when it is ranged as parallel planes of minerals forming metamorphic rocks
to each other, collecting in the form of lenses or bands,
It develops planar structures that occur with both planar and elongated flattened mineral grains, and ıt are
repeatedly layered and dyed from a rock under high pressure and heat .
Schistosity: Platy minerals are discernible with the unaided eye and exhibit a planar or layered structure under high
pressure and heat.
Lineation: passing there through regardless of their origin rock, repeated, visible linear eye structures of all kinds.
Gneissic texture : Segregation of minerals leads to distinctive banded appearance
Metamorphic Textures
• Cleavage: It is called cleavage of wrinkled planes connected by directional
pressures, deformed by layering planes, which develops at a certain angle
and develops in close proximity to each other, in parallel and in more than
one direction. Cleavage is a secondary texture that allows a rock to
separate into planes.
• Mylonite: Rock in the deep portions of faults undergoes dynamic
metamorphism and creates a fine-grained metamorphic rock called a
mylonite. Rock in the deep portions of faults undergoes dynamic
metamorphism and creates a fine-grained metamorphic rock called a
mylonite. During the deformation occurring in the fault zone, the primary
grains of the rock are broken and crushed to form the milonitic zone, which
forms again smaller rocks, smaller than 0.5 mm, forming the milonitis.
metamorphic rocks: basic classification
based on rock texture
foliated (layered)
type of foliation -- e.g. slaty
non-foliated (non-layered)
composition -- e.g. marble
foliated (layered) metamorphic rocks
results from differential stress (not equal in all directions)
foliation
appearance under microscope
non-foliated foliated
Engineering Properties of Metamorphic Rocks
• Rocks showing foliation should not be preferred as construction materials in
terms of strength.
• The strengths of the foliated metamorphic rocks, along with the leavening and
foliations that develop as a result of the metamorphism, are decreasing along
the foliage planes due to clay minerals that swell in water like chlorite and
epidote.
• Marbles from metamorphic rocks are preferred as a good building material. It
is the building material that is required in the building coverings.
• The metamorphic masses provide a solid structure for the foundation of the
building, if it is not separated. Some slip planes can be used without any
support if the slip gaps are not full with clays.
Engineering Properties of Metamorphic Rocks
• Metamorphics can be exposed to change immediately under favorable climatic conditions. Due to the
changing construction, volume increases and pressure increases. Such features should be observed in
tunnels and dam constructions and other constructions.
• Schist rocks along the schistosity plane cause shifts in the excavations. This is especially the case for the
dissociated regions where the schistose and cleavage are opened and weakened and the rock resistance is
greatly reduced.
• Schists and similar rocks create landslide hazards in road constructions, dam abrasions and reservoir slopes.
• Massive gneisses provide very good conditions for large underground openings. Facilities for swimming
pools, theaters, skating rinks, industrial warehouses, production plants and many other activities have been
created economically and safely in large openings to such rocks.
• Schistosized and competing gneisses can create stability problems in underground openings. Even in the
ravaged schist and the small tunnels opened in the phyllite, the ceiling may collapse. As the metamorphic
rocks are cracked and contested on the surface, excavations cause the rock blocks to move.
Sedimantary Rocks
• Materials which are derived by all kinds of rocks (magmatic,
metamorphic, sedimanter) are subject to physical chemical
and biological disruption and dispersion under all kinds of
conditions, then they stay in place or are transported in
different ways and settled in a certain place. It is called as
«sedimen»
• Sedimentary rocks are formed by the accumulation of
inorganic and organic sediments which undergo compaction
and cementation to form rock.
Matrix: Cement:
is the finer grains dissolved
or material that
substance
surrounds the
that bounds
larger clasts. It
the
consist of either
sediments.
clay, silt and sand.
1. Calcareous
2. siliceous
Fine-gravel/
Any rock fragment Granule
(size is > 4 mm=Pebble) (size <4mm)
Sediment
loose, solid particles originating from:
• Weathering and erosion of preexisting rocks
• Chemical precipitation from solution,
including secretion by organisms in water
Sedimantary Rocks
• There are at least four phases in the generation of sedimantary rocks;
These phases;
1. Weathering and erosion
2. Transportation: Movement of the material coming from the decay of the
rocks in various ways
3. Deposition: Storage or sedimentation of transported material in certain
places,
4. Lithification: Compaction and consolidation of stored or deposited
sediments after diagenesis
Transportation
• Movement of sediment away from its source, typically by water, wind, or ice
• Rounding of particles occurs due to abrasion during transport
• Sorting occurs as sediment is separated according to grain size by transport agents, especially
running water
• Sediment size decreases with increased transport distance
Deposition
o Settling and coming to rest of transported material
o Accumulation of chemical or organic sediments, typically in water
o Environment of deposition is the location in which deposition occurs
• Deep sea floor
• Beach
• Desert dunes
• River channel
• Lake bottom
Preservation
o Sediment must be preserved, as by burial with additional sediments, in order to
become a sedimentary rock
Lithification
o General term for processes converting loose sediment into sedimentary rock
o Combination of compaction and cementation
Sedimantary Rocks
• Diagenesis is the term used for all of the changes that a sediment
undergoes after deposition and before the transition to
metamorphism. The multifarious processes that come under the term
diagenesis are chemical, physical, and biological.
Diagenesis
Compaction Alteration
Cementing • Limestone - Dolomite
• Quartz • Plagioclase – Albite
• Calcite Recrystallization
• Iron Oxide • Limestone
• Clay
• Glauconite
• Feldspar
Sedimantary Rocks
Some of the criteria that distinguish sediman from sedimentary rocks are:
Sedimans are loose because they do not bond to one another and do not undergo diagenesis.
In Sedimanter rocks, granules are connected to each other by an intermediate material,
namely cement. They are also diagenetic and petrified. Contrary to sedimans, they are
consolidated and hardened.
Sedimentary rocks show stratification and provide different shapes when stratified (Graded
stratification, cross stratification, etc.) Sediments are usually found in mass. They do not
show stratification.
Sedimentary rocks contain organic residues. Organisms leave behind organic and inorganic
materials after their deaths. Inorganic wastes become fossilized and organic materials leave
their places to organic minerals such as petroleum and coal.
Sedimentary rocks may undergo some changes after their formation. This is called
deformation. As a result of deformation are folded, bent, broken, or even are displaced.
IMPORTANCE OF SEDIMENTARY ROCK
“Present is the key to the past”
• Helps in knowing depositional environment viz. marine (ocean deposits),
fluvial (river deposits), aeolian (wind deposits), glacial, estuarine,
Lacustrine (lake deposits) etc.
• Helps in knowing the provenance (i.e. source area of the sediments);
change in climatic conditions i.e. in knowing and understanding old
climate=paleoclimate.
TYPES OF SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
Chemical
Organic rocks
Clastic rocks
Carbonate rocks
• Sandstones
Organic rocks
• Conglomerates Form basically from
Form due to
CaCO – both by
• Breccia
3
decomposition of
chemical leaching and
• Shale/mudstones organic remains
by organic source
under temperature
(biochemical) eg.
and pressure eg.
Limestone; dolomite
Coal/Lignite etc.
Evaporitic rocks
These rocks are formed
due to evaporation of
saline water (sea water)
eg. Gypsum, Halit
(rock salt)
Sedimentary Rocks are classified based on their
components.
Clastic Chemical
Organic
1.) Conglomerate
1.) Limestone
1.) Coal
2.) Sandstone
3.) Shale
2.) Fossiliferous Limestone 2.) Salt
Environments affect the type of sediment.
Environments change throughout geologic time.
Where do you think these rocks are from? GRAND CANYON!!!
Different environments produce different
sedimentary rocks.
Different environments produce different
sedimentary rocks.
Different environments produce different
sedimentary rocks.
Different environments produce different
sedimentary rocks.
Sedimantary Rocks
Clastic Sedimentary Rocks; formed from broken rock fragments
weathered and eroded by river, glacier, wind and sea waves. These
clastic sediments are found deposited on floodplains, beaches, in
desert and on the sea floors.
These rocks usually form in water environments such as, rivers, lakes,
oceans, but can also form in deserts.
Consist of solid particles from weathered rocks. These rock fragments
include pebbles, sand, silt and clay.
This figure shows how
clastic sediment of various
sizes will, after compaction
and cementation, form
different types of detrital
sedimentary rocks.
The process of sediment
turning into rock is called
lithification.
sediments
gravel sand silt clay
sedimentary
rocks
conglomerate sandstone siltstone shale
Chemical Sedimentary Rocks
These rocks form as a result of chemical weathering dissolving chemicals and transporting it in
solution. When conditions are right, these dissolved chemicals change back into a solid through the
processes of precipitation and evaporation.
Precipitation: Process where chemicals dissolved on solution, fall out of solution and forms a solid
material. Most common in shallow water environments.
Evaporation: Process where there is a change in state from a liquid to a gas. Chemicals dissolved in
the liquid (water) are left behind as a solid material.
Chemical Sedimentary Rocks
These rocks usually form in water environments such as lakes and shallow seas or oceans.
Some examples of chemical sedimentary rocks include;
1)Limestone (Calcite) - (form by precipitation)
2)Rock Gypsum - (form by precipitation and evaporation)
3)Rock salt (Halite) – (from by evaporation)
4)Coquina - (form by biochemical processes)
Organic Sedimentary Rocks
These rocks form as a result of once living material accumulating to form solid rock.
The most common organic rock is coal, which forms when plant material in water saturated
environments (swamps) die and accumulate to form peat. As peat is buried it compresses and eventually
changes to form coal.
Textures of Sedimentary Rocks
• Most sedimentary rocks are derived by processes of weathering, transportation, deposition, and diagenesis.
The final texture (grain size, shape, sorting, mineralogy, etc.) in a sediment or sedimentary rocks is dependent
on process that occur during each stage. The points below summarize the basic factors affecting rock texture.
– The nature of the source rocks (the rocks that were eroded to create the sediments). This determines the original
shape of the grains and the mineralogical composition of the original sediment.
– The strength of the wind or water currents that carry and deposit the sediment. This determines whether or not grains
are transported or deposited. The deposition process also controls structures (see sedimentary structures below) that
could be preserved in the sediment and thus give clues to the environment of deposition.
– The distance transported or time in the transportation process. The longer grains are in the transportation process the
more likely they are to change shape and become sorted on the basis of size and mineralogy. This also controls extent
to which they break down to stable minerals during the transportation process.
– Biological activity with the sediment prior to diagenesis. Burrowing organisms can redistribute sediment after it has
been deposited, thus erasing some of the clues to the original environment of deposition.
– The chemical environment under which diagenesis occurs. During diagenesis grains are compacted, new minerals
precipitate in the pore spaces, some minerals continue to react to produce new minerals, and some minerals
recrystallize. What happens depends on the composition of fluids moving through the rock, the composition of the
mineral grains, and the pressure and temperature conditions attained during diagenesis.
Textures of Sedimentary Rocks
Grain sorting: Sorting refers to the uniformity of grain size in a sediment or sedimentary rock.
Rounding: During the transportation process, grains may be reduced in size due to abrasion. Random
abrasion results in the eventual rounding off of the sharp corners and edges of grains. Thus, the degree
of rounding of grains gives us clues to the amount of time a sediment has been in the transportation cycle.
Textures of Sedimentary Rocks
• Sphericity is controlled by the original shape of the grain.
The longer the sediment is transported, the more time is
available for grains to lose their rough edges and corners by
abrasion
Layering (bedding)
One of the most obvious features of sedimentary rocks and sediment is the layered structure which they exhibit.
The layers are evident because of differences in mineralogy, clast size, degree of sorting, or color of the different
layers. In rocks, these differences may be made more prominent by the differences in resistance to weathering or
color changes brought out by weathering.
Cross Bedding
Consists of sets of beds that are inclined relative to one another. The beds are inclined in the direction that the wind
or water was moving at the time of deposition. Boundaries between sets of cross beds usually represent an
erosional surface. Cross bedding is very common in beach deposits, sand dunes, and river deposited sediment.
Individual beds within cross-bedded strata are useful indicators of current direction and tops and bottoms. Note
how the beds become asymptotic to the lower boundary on which they were deposited
Graded Bedding
As current velocity decreases, the larger or more dense particles are deposited first, followed by smaller
particles. This results in bedding showing a decrease in grain size from the bottom of the bed to the top of the
bed. This gives us a method for determining tops and bottoms of beds, since reverse grading will not be expected
unless deposition occurs under unusual circumstances. Note that reverse graded bedding cannot occur as current
velocity increases, because each layer will simply be removed as the current achieves a velocity high enough to
carry sediment of a particular size.
Engineering Properties of Sedimentary Rocks
Physical and especially mechanical properties of the existing rocks should be determined by
laboratory tests and tests. The results should be numbered and used in basic and static
calculations.
The rocks have a certain carrying power. Rocks that are overloaded by forces change structure
and shape, so the upper structures can be damaged.
The ground that is overloaded on the surface shows different physical and chemical properties.
The factors affecting the cost and safety of the construction which are known as the
engineering properties of the rocks are the specific gravity, porosity, water absorption, unit
volume weight, resistance corresponding to the press, resistance to atmosphere effect,
wear, fragmentation,
Engineering Properties of Sedimentary Rocks
With laboratory experiments;
It should be determined whether they are essential or not according to various rock
and soil conditions. Stability and resistance to depression should be determined.
The properties of storage (S) or permeability (K) and transmissibility T of groundwater
of various rocks and soils should be determined.
Whether or not the rocks are suitable for building materials should be determined.
Engineering Properties of Sedimentary Rocks
• The resistance of the sedimentary rocks to breakage and pressures varies depending on the hardness grades and the
susceptibility of the minerals to water. For example; Clay, marl, gypsum and limestone cemented sandstones and
conglomerates show little resistance to water pressures. Silica cemented ones are more resistant, like granite and basalt.
Good cemented rocks have high porosity and permeability ratings, so their water storage capacities are high, while their
resistance is low.
• Sedimantary rocks containing clay minerals such as clay and shale contain water in a small or large amount depending on
the type of minerals they contain. Their indentations loosen or degrade according to the water content. As a result,
resistance and handling power are reduced.
• Limestones are used as building material for producing lime, aggregate, gravel and building stone. The resistance of the
limestones to be used in this area must be at least 200 kg / cm2 with respect to water absorption, less abrasion, and pore
and porosity
• The resistance of the limestones is low and high, so the stratification of the limestones is effective.
• Cracking systems and melting gaps should be avoided or minimized in limestones if they are used in foundation and dam
construction.
• Limestones must be cracked and melting space at groundwater investigations. Limestones which have high porosity and
cracked provides to generate high disharges karstic springs.
Flatirons, Boulder, Colorado
Garden of the Gods, Colorado
Fig. 2.9
MAGMA
IGNEOUS
Solidification
MAGMA
IGNEOUS
Plutonic
Solidification
MAGMA
Volcanic
IGNEOUS
Plutonic
Solidification
MAGMA
Weathering &
Erosion
Uplift
Volcanic
IGNEOUS
Plutonic
Solidification
MAGMA
SSEEDDIIMMEENNTT
Weathering &
Erosion
Volcanic
IGNEOUS
Plutonic
Solidification
MAGMA
Erosion
SEDIMENT
Weathering &
Erosion
Transport
Deposition
Volcanic
SEDIMENTARY
IGNEOUS
Plutonic
Solidification
MAGMA
Deposition
SEDIMENT
Weathering &
Erosion
Burial/Compaction
Cementation
Volcanic
SEDIMENTARY
IGNEOUS
Plutonic
Solidification
MAGMA
Deposition
SEDIMENT
Weathering &
Erosion
Burial/Compaction
Cementation
Volcanic
SEDIMENTARY
IGNEOUS
Plutonic Increased P&T
METAMORPHIC
Solidification
MAGMA
Deposition
SEDIMENT
Weathering &
Erosion
Burial/Compaction
Cementation
Volcanic Can you see
SEDIMENTARY
IGNEOUS any shortcuts?
Plutonic Increased P&T
METAMORPHIC
Solidification
Melting
MAGMA
Deposition
SEDIMENT
Weathering &
Erosion
Burial/Compaction
Cementation
Volcanic
SEDIMENTARY
IGNEOUS
Plutonic Increased P&T
METAMORPHIC
Solidification
Melting
MAGMA
Deposition
SEDIMENT
Weathering &
Erosion
Burial/Compaction
Cementation
Volcanic
SEDIMENTARY
IGNEOUS
Plutonic Increased P&T
METAMORPHIC
Solidification
Melting
MAGMA
Weathering
A. Mechanical Weathering
B. Chemical Weathering
C. Soil
Weathering
Mechanical Weathering

Physical disintegration of rock

(with no chemical alteration)
Chemical Weathering

Chemical alteration of minerals

within the rock
Usually softening or dissolving

the minerals
Forming clays, oxides and

solutes
AGENTS OF PHYSICAL WEATHERING
1. Frost Action-The freezing and thawing causes alternate
expansion and contraction of rocks eventually breaking them
apart.
Dominate in mountain or
polar regions.
More likely to occur in
winter
The result of
Mechanical weathering
Rock falls and slides
Crushing and abrasion (more mechanical
weathering)
Rock Avalanches
Slopes of rock fragments may let go and careen
downhill as a very fast flow
Talus Slopes
The result of

Mechanical weathering

Rock falls and slides

Crushing and abrasion (more

mechanical weathering)
Rock Avalanches

Slopes of rock fragments may let

go and careen downhill as a very
fast flow
MECHANICAL WEATHERING
Ice
Salt crystal growth
As salt crystals gradually
grow larger, they weaken
the rock by pushing apart
surrounding grains or
enlarging tiny cracks
Unloading
Pressure release forms
sheet joints and exfoliation
Sheeting is caused by the
expansion of crystalline rock
as erosion removes the
overying material, a process
termed unloading
Mechanical
Weathering
An exfoliation

dome in
Yosemite, CA
(Half Dome)
2. Biological Action - With plant growth the root system will increase in volume
and cause cracks in the rock to expand.
Lichens are primary soil producers
creating conditions for larger plant growth.
Chemical Weathering - when agents of weathering chemically change the
composition of a rock.
II. AGENTS OF CHEMICAL WEATHERING
1. Oxidation– Oxygen combines with minerals to form oxides.
(iron + oxygen = Rust)
Oxidation weakens the bedrock making it softer.
Chemical Weathering

Dissolving  Dissolved ions

Oxidation  Iron in Ferromag. Minerals  Iron

Oxides (e.g., Hematite)
Formation of Clays from silicates (e.g., Feldspar)

2. Hydration- minerals absorb water and chemically change the composition of
the material
Ex. granite contains mica.
Mica has a weak chemical
composition and absorb water.
Turns into clay
3. Carbonation– When pollutants like Carbon Dioxide, Nitrogen & Sulfuric
Oxides mix with rain water creating acid rain, which can dissolve limestone
and harm the living environment.
 Coal Burning For Electricity
 Fossil Fuel Consumption for Cars
4. Water- Is unique and dissolves most minerals and metals in our environment.
(universal solvent).
Chemical weathering:
ion exchange and the chemical breakdown of feldspar
Chemical Weathering
Hydrolysis
Oxidation:
4FeSiO + O + H O  FeO(OH) + 4SiO
3 2 2 2
Hydration:
CaSO + 2H O  CaSO ·2H O
4 2 4 2
Factors affecting weathering
 Climate
 Different climates and temperatures
produce more favorable forms of
weathering.
Chemical weathering is more prevalent in

warm, wet tropical climates
Humid Climates are moist and the rate of

weathering is fairly fast.
Mechanical weathering less important here

Mechanical weathering is more prevalent in

cold, relatively dry regions
Arid Climates are very dry and the rate of

weathering is slow
Chemical weathering occurs slowly here

 Usually in the presence of heat weathering
rates will also increase.
Factors affecting weathering:
color dots on map match colors on chart
Cold and Humid-Physical weathering is dominate at high latitudes
altitudes, or in the winter.
-Frost Action and Glacial Abrasion
Hot and Humid - Chemical weathering is dominate near the equator and in the
summer.
-Oxidation, Hydration
Humid climates also favor
chemical weathering and
increase the rate in which
water will dissolve minerals.
Hot & humid climates can also
increase the rate of physical
weathering by biological action.
In the mountains and at the
poles physical weathering like
frost action and abrasion are
more likely.
2.Particle Size and Shape as particle size decreases the weathering rate
increases
- When the surface area increase, more sides are
able to react with the elements
Angular Sediments have more surface area.
-weather at a faster rate.
Round sediments have less surface area
-weathering rate decreases.
3. Mineral Composition - some rocks are resistant to weathering because of
their composition
More Resistant
Hard Rocks have Strong
Chemical Compositions
Less Resistant
Soft Rocks have Weak
chemical compositions
Rocks will weather at different rates due to their chemical compositions.
Granite w/ strong chemical Limestone w/ weak chemical
composition (hard rock) composition (soft rock)
Rock composition

Minerals weather at

different rates
Calcite weathers quickly

through dissolution
Quartz is very resistant to

chemical and mechanical
weathering
Mafic rocks with

ferromagnesian minerals
weather more easily
Rock structure

Distribution of joints

influence rate of
weathering
Relatively close joints

weather faster
Topography

Weathering occurs

faster on steeper
slopes
Rockslides

Vegetation

Contribute to mechanical

and chemical weathering
Promotes weathering due

to increased water retention
Vegetation removal

increases soil loss
Vegetation can both hold water
And increase weathering. If removed
Rocks may also be vulnerable to abrasion
Silicate
Structure Mineral
Rates of Weathering
Isolated
Olivine
Silicate
y
Structure b
Stable at High s
 Single Chain n
Pyroxene
o
Structure
Temperatures Group i
d
n
a
Quickly Weathered

,
s
e g
Double Chain Amphibole d n
Structure Group i i
x r
o e
h
, t
y
a
Mica a e
l w
Group c
Sheet
o l
Structure t a
Clay c
d
i
Group e m
t
r e
 Slowly Weathered e h
Feldspar v c
Framework n
Group
o
Stable at Atmos.
 Structure
C
Temperatures Quartz
Mech. Weath.
IV. Products of Weathering - sediments and soils
1. Sediment Types
a. Solids – Are clastic sediments
such as pebbles, sand, silt, or clay
b. Colloids– Are suspended clay size particles
c. Ionic Solutions– Are dissolved compounds in water
Products of Weathering
Clay

Tiny mineral particles of any kind that have physical properties like

those of the clay minerals
Clays are hydrous alumino-silicate minerals

Products of Weathering
Sand

A sediment made of relatively coarse

mineral grains
Soil

Mixture of minerals with different

grain sizes, along with some materials
of biologic origin
Humus

Partially decayed organic matter in soil

2. Soil Types
a. Residual– Soils formed from the weathering of the local
bedrock and have the same mineral composition.
b. Transported- Soil that has been moved & the sediments
are not of the same composition as the local rock
Soil Horizons
A. Top layer rich in organics & minerals from
biologic activity.
B. Sediments with minerals dissolved from
above are found here.
C. Mostly un-weathered bedrock.
Soil development from local bedrock.
Stage 1 Mostly un-weathered bedrock
Stage 2 Development of top soil by biologic activity
Stage 3 Mature thick and well developed soil horizons
Soil is non-renewable resource
1 inch is made for every 100 years in New York
Different climates produce different soil types
Form at different rates.
Differential Weathering
John Ford Point Monument, Arizona.
Ship Rock, New Mexico
Volcanic Neck
ENGINEERING PROPERTIES OF ROCKS
Engineering properties of rock determines geologic, chemical, mechanical, deformation and
technological properties of rocks
1. Geological properties
a) Generation time of rocks
b) Generation environment of rocks
c) Lithological properties of rocks
d) Structural properties of rocks
e) Hydrological properties of rocks
ENGINEERING PROPERTIES OF ROCKS
2. Chemical properties; include behavior of melting, weathering and against water with respect the
compositon of rocks. It directly influences various engineering works and their projects.
3. Physical Properties; Unit volume weight, density, natural water content, porosity and void ratio,
degree of saturation, permeability, weight water absorption and volumetric water absorption are
physical properties of rocks.
4. Mechanical Properties; Are characteristics that determine the behavior of rocks under various
stresses
a) Compression strength (Uniaxial compressive strength, Schmidt Attractor Test, Point load
resistance, Disc Shear Index Test)
b) Tensile strength (Direct pull, Indirect pull (Brazilian test))
c) Shear Strength (Triaxial compression test, Direct shear test)
d) Buckling Strength
e) Bending Strength
5. Deformation Properties; Elastic modulus and Poisson ratio, Rigidity module etc.
6.Technological Properties; Pierceable, breakable, excavable, interceptable, polishable,
machinable, usable, tunnelable ...
Rock Material, Discontinuity, Rock Mass
Intact rock material: Rock mass is a matrix consisting of rock
material and rock discontinuities. As discussed early, rock
discontinuity that distributed extensively in a rock mass is
predominantly joints. Faults, bedding planes and dyke intrusions
are localised features and therefore are dealt individually.
Properties of rock mass therefore are governed by the parameters
of rock joints and rock material, as well as boundary conditions
Discontinuity: A discontinuity is a plane or surface that marks a
change in physical or chemical characteristics in a soil or rock
mass. A discontinuity can be in the form of a bedding plane,
schistosity, foliation, joint, cleavage, fracture, fissure, crack, or
fault plane. This discontinuity controls the type of failure which
may occur in a rock slope. The properties of discontinuities such
as orientation, persistence, roughness and infilling are play
important role in the stability of jointed rock slope. Discontinuities
may occur multiple times with broadly the same mechanical
characteristics in a discontinuity set, or may be a single
discontinuity. It makes a soil or rock mass anisotropic.
Rock Material, Discontinuity, Rock Mass
In various engineering works and excavations; projects such as dams, tunnels, underground power
plants, bridges, etc., calculation of the stability of foundation and materials which are used for them,
the discontinuity properties that affect the engineering properties of the rocks in advance with the
determined deformations in front of various forces must be well known.
Massive rock types: This rock types are found below the degradation zones and rock masses which do not
include foliation such as massive sandstone and granites are in this group. Such masses are considered as
continuous, homogeneous, isotropic rocks.
Partially jointed rock mass: rocks which have fewer than three and continous discontunity can be obtained
as individual blocks when excavated.
Partially Blocked Rock Mass : It is a rock mass which includes fewer than three discontinutious and whose
discontiunity are filled by secondary material and which contain closed secondary discontinuity. If one of
the closed joint sets is opened due to deformation, blockage in the rock mass develops.
Blocked Rock Mass: It is rock masses that contain well-developed, open or soft fillings, high continuity, and a
set of discontinuities in excess of 3. It is easy to obtain blocks from such rock masses during excavation.
Hollow Rock Mass: The soluble limestones in this group are composed of dolomite, gypsum, rock salt and a
soluble cement
Very porous rock mass: In such rock masses, significant amounts of pores influence the mechanical
behavior of the rock.
Advanced fissured rock mass: Fissured rock substantially brittleness and anisotropy also contain small
discontinuities frequent cause a deviation with respect to all mechanical properties.
Jammed and swollen rock mass: Such rock masses, when they come into contact with water, suddenly and
intermittently crack and change volume and contain active clay minerals. The basic principles of ground
mechanics can be applied to such rocks.
Rock Mass Properties And Test Methods
Rock Mass Behavior (Scale Effect) due to Increase in
Excavation Dimensions
Definition of Rock Masses
Discontunity properties are defined for;
• Determination of geological structure,
• Engineering classification of rock mass
• Determination of rock stability
The rock masses are not continuous, homogeneous and isotropic
materials, but are cut by various discontinuities. For this reason, the
behavior of rock masses, which can be exposed to external loads, can
not be analyzed as close to reality without taking into account the
characteristics of the discontinuities they contain.
Discontunity properties of rock mass
The properties of discontinuities are determined and / or identified on the surface or in drilling cores by using
different measurement techniques. Physical parameters of discontinuities;
Type of discontinuity

Discontinuity interval and frequency

Continuity of discontinuity

Roughness and fluctuation of discontinuity surface

Properties of filling material

The strength of discontinuity surface and

the degree of degradation
Water condition on discontinuity surface

The number of discontinuity set and

discontinuity orientation
Block size

Discontinuity Properties / Discontinuity Types
Group 1: discontinuities as set or appears to be a system, which can be subjected to statistical analysis and surface
along the layer in which the occurrence of any displacement, such as joint, cleavage (cleavage) Schistosity, foliation
lamination.
Group 2: Located alone, not subjected to statistical analysis and a displacement is observed along its surface such as
fault and shear zone.
1. Contact: It is boundary between two
different lithological boundaries, it is
either conformal or discorformal
2. Structure: It is developed depending on
the grain size and orientation, the
mineralogical composition, the color
and hardness of the surface during the
occurunce of sedimentary rocks.
Discontinuity Properties / Discontinuity Types
3. Fault surfaces exposed to shear failure where a relative displacement
from a few centimeters to a kilometer long occurs.
4. Joint surfaces Fractures where it is not possible to change anywhere
along the Joint Surface.
5. Foliation is the metamorphic origin weakness planes which are formed
by preferential orientation of minerals under high pressure and / or
temperature.
6. The veins are fractures filled by a different material from the perimeter
of the rock. Since the surfaces are not discrete, they are not weak
discontinuities.
Discontinuities Properties / discontinuity and
Frequency Range
The discontinuity interval (or intermediate distance) is the distance between two discontinuities in a
discontinuity set consisting of 2 adjacent discontinuities or parallel discontinuities in the rock masses. This
value can be measured from the discontinuities intersecting the strip meter along the strip meter laid on a
certain area on the outcrop surface as well as from the drilling cores.
Discontinuities Properties / Discontinuity Continuity
The continuity of discontinuities is an important parameter affecting the stability of discontinuities. As the
continuity increases, the slope durability increases. Continuous and uninterrupted joints out of the slope in
figures are observed. Continuity is measured directly by the tape measure in the rock outcrop and is
recorded as a three-dimensional concept.
Discontinuities Properties / Roughness and ripples
Roughness and waviness are a measure of the deviation of a discontinuity
surface from small and large scale planarity, respectively. Ripple
characterizes a deviation in a large measure from planarity, while deviations
in a small measure are defined as roughness.
Discontinuities Properties / Discontinuities Interval
The clearance is the perpendicular distance between two opposing surfaces of a
discontinuity, which may be empty or filled with water or any filler material.
Filling in discontinuities
Filler material is a material that fills between two opposing surfaces of discontinuity and is generally
weaker than the parent rock material. The filler material reduces the roughness effect and reduces the
shear strength of the discontinuities.
Discontinuities Properties / Degradation and Strength of
Discontinuity Surfaces
The rock mass is often degraded in areas close to the surface, the deeper can be altered depending on the
hydrothermal process. The impairment on the discontinuity surfaces is one of the factors affecting the
strength of the discontinuities and should be defined by taking into consideration both the rock material
and the impairment classifications recommended for the rock mass.
Discontinuities Properties / Degradation and Strength of
Discontinuity Surfaces
The strength of the discontinuity surfaces is closely related to the degree of impairment of
these surfaces and the rock material in the immediate vicinity. For this purpose, ISRM
(1981) proposed a classification criterion of dislocation which can be used during field
study. These categorizations lead to subjective evaluations in some cases since they are
.
purely observational
Discontinuities Properties / Degradation and Strength of
Discontinuity Surfaces
In order to estimate the compressive strength of the discontinuity surfaces, the
application is usually determined indirectly by Schmidt attractive experiment, while
utilizing the simple classification of the land with definitions (ISRM, 1981).
Discontinuities Properties / Degradation and Strength of
Discontinuity Surfaces
Discontinuity Properties / Water Conditions at
Discontinuities
The infiltration of water in rock masses occurs through the flow of water through the
discontinuities associated with each other (secondary permeability). The mechanical
properties of the rock mass change, especially in the presence of a continuous stream of
water along discontinuities. The water stress between the surfaces of discontinuity
reduces normal shear stress.
Engineering Classification of Rocks
Classification by discontinuities
The rocks in the earth are divided into the following classes according to their discontinuities.
Massive
Thick layered
Stratified
Laminated
Cracked and microcracked
Articulated
Fault
Schistosite and Foliated
Curved
Classification by Mechanical Properties
Drilling parameters detemined from drilling logs
Drilling parameters detemined from drilling logs