Self-Assessment Form 
Instructions for Applicants
General: 
You must use your WES course-by-course (CxC) assessment to complete this form. 
When completing the self-assessment form, use the Bachelor’s degree courses.
Only use your Master’s or Ph.D. in engineering if they are necessary. If you use too many graduate courses, the degree will not be eligible to use for waiving confirmatory exams.
Only complete column C2. Do not enter any information in column C3 or C4. If you do, it will be deleted.
Enter the year, course name, credits and grade from the WES assessment Course-by-Course Analysis.
Both the Basic Studies and Discipline Specific Syllabus Tables contain compulsory subjects and elective subjects. Include courses that cover any part of the syllabus even if you have more than the minimum number in the elective sections.
Colour code the content in column C1 by highlighting it the same colour as the corresponding course you entered in column C2.

Once you have completed column C2, submit the Word document to documents-academicreview@apegs.ca.

Program Syllabus (only required if requested by APEGS):
Provide the program syllabus in a PDF document through the Contact Us page on the APEGS website.
If the course names in the program syllabus are different than those in your WES assessment you must provide an explanation of how they correlate in the program syllabus column of the form. 
Use the page number of the PDF document of the program syllabus (not the original page number).

By submitting this self-assessment, I declare that I have read and followed the instructions and that this self-assessment is accurate and complete, to the best of my knowledge and ability, and that I have provided all the relevant information that I have available to me. I understand that if information is incorrect or missing, that it may delay my application and may result in the assignment of academic deficiencies.

Self-Assessment Form – Geological Engineering

Use the information provided on the WES assessment to complete this information

SELF-ASSESSMENT – FOR APPLICANT TO COMPLETE

BASIC STUDIES SYLLABUS TABLE


DISCIPINE SPECIFIC SYLLABUS TABLE
